plants and animal 2s

4. So many different plants!
5. Parts of plants
6. Animals around us
22
The topic aims to make children aware
of the variety of plants that they see in
their surroundings. The questions below
should stimulate students to look closely at
the plants around them: near the school,
around the house or garden and while travelling.
Occasions like outdoor walks and class picnics
are ideal for carrying out observations in the form
of games with the whole class.
Watch out for plants!

Activity 4.1: Meet a plant ... Do you know its name?

Now compare it with another nearby plant. What are the
differences between these two plants? Find as many
differences as you can. Look at the leaves, stem,
branches, flowers and fruits (if any). In what ways are
these plants similar?
Select any two nearby trees or small plants, preferably those
which might be of interest to the children due to their attractive
flowers or leaves or edible fruits or playtime possibilities.
Note the words that students use in their description. They
would have their own ways of describing plants, perhaps with
words like, tall, short, big, small, fat, thin, thick, green, yellow,
brown, etc. They may also know words for parts of plants,
like leaves, flowers, stem, branches, trunk and roots. Try to use
the students' own words in discussions, while also introducing
simple new vocabulary.

Activity 4.2: Outdoor game

Take this leaf, go search out the plant that it came from.
Also look at the other plants around. Which ones do you
recognise by name?
Blackboard work: Match the names of parts of the plant
with parts shown in the picture.
Again, the purpose is to become familiar with a few words describing parts of a plant: words
needed later to talk about various types of plants.
4. So many different plants!
Student’s Drawings
23
You may uproot a small weed to show the parts of the plant. Later on press the weed
between sheets of a newspaper. When it is dry stick it on to a chart paper with labels for
the plant parts.
Blackboard work: Which different plants do you know? Which have you really seen?
Write the names of plants suggested by students on the board: you may organise these in
categories like, trees, shrubs and herbs, grasses, climbers and creepers.
Tell me about some of these plants, how do they look? Which of them are
very big, which are small? Which of them stand straight, which do not?
Show the students a tree and a shrub. Ask them to notice the differences in size and stem of
these plants.
flower
leaf
fruit
branch
stem
roots
24
Trees
Some kinds of plants after many years become big
and tall trees. The stem of the plant grows into a thick,
woody trunk, which supports a crown of branches, with
leaves, flowers and fruits. Which of the plants that you
named are trees? Which are the most common trees around you?
Some more trees: peepal, banyan, teak, deodar, gulmohar, date palm ...
Look at any nearby tree and describe how tall it is.
Compare the height of the tree with the height of some other tall thing,
like a building or an electricity pole or another tree.
Look carefully at the branches of trees. Show with your arms how
the branches have spread.
Some branches may spread outwards, some may point upwards
like in the Indian coral tree (Erythrina species), yet others may hang
down towards the ground, like the pink cassia and the willow.
Some trees have branches which are arranged very neatly,
like the copper pod (Peltophorum inerme).
Try to draw the shapes of some trees.
Some trees are shaped like an umbrella. The leaf canopies of some trees have a flat base like
the christmas tree (Araucaria species) and the red silk cotton tree (Bombax ceiba).
Sit down under a tree (preferably a large, shady tree). Close your eyes and listen. Do you
hear sounds made by squirrels, birds or insects on the tree? Find out the names of the birds
which visit the tree. Do you hear the rustling of leaves? Do leaves of all trees make sounds
when the wind blows through them? Do some trees make louder rustling sounds?
On long journeys by bus or train, notice carefully many different types of trees.
25
Shrubs and herbs
Shrubs do not grow as tall as trees. They usually have hard stems and branches.
Some shrubs: shoeflower, jasmine, bhindi, tomato, brinjal ...
Herbs are usually smaller than shrubs. Herbs have soft stems and branches.
Some herbs: tulsi, coriander and pulses like toor or arhar, moong, masoor ...
Recall where you have seen shrubs or herbs. Perhaps you have walked
through fields or along roads with plants on both sides. Were these plants
taller than you or shorter? Describe their smells, colours, shapes, flowers,
fruit, and anything else you noticed about them.
Are there shrubs or herbs in or around your home - in your garden or kept in pots? Find out
the names of these plants and ask why these plants have been grown there: for pleasing
surroundings? pretty flowers or leaves? for food? or medicine? Have you seen shrubs grown
as hedges to mark a boundary? In a garden you may have seen several shrubs all of the
same height. How do you think that might have happened?
Grasses
Grasses have thin, long leaves, but no branches.
Show the students a shrub and a grass. Ask them to notice the difference in size, stem and
leaves. Grasses are the most common types of plants. You see them everywhere: in fields, on
hills, on the sides of roads, in gardens and playgrounds. Even food-grain cereals like rice,
wheat, jowar, ragi and corn are kinds of grasses! Bamboo and sugarcane are huge grasses!
"Lawns" are made by planting a single kind of grass, usually with fine, soft leaves, on a patch
of land and keeping it trimmed evenly.

Activity 4.3: Bring different kinds of grasses to the class. Do you know the names of some

of these? Arrange an exhibition of these grasses in your class.
Children in rural areas would know many different kinds of grasses which are used for
different purposes like, animal grazing, thatching, weaving, making ropes, as medicines, for
religious ceremonies (for example durva), etc.
Have you ever walked through tall grass or through a rice field? What happens when a
strong wind blows through a grassy field? Which kind of plants move or sway the most -
grasses, shrubs or trees? Try to explain why there is a difference in the way they
move.
26
Look at different small plants around your school. Which are shrubs,
herbs, which are grasses? Which plant parts do you see in them,
which do you not?
Climbers and creepers
Look at the stem of a climber. Compare it with the stem of a tree
or shrub.
The stem of a climber is long and thin like a rope. It is not stiff enough
to hold the plant upright.
A climber grows along a support (such as a stick) or
around a shrub or a tree. Usually its stem has small
hooks or tendrils which wind around the support.
Which climbers do you know?
Some more climbers: karela (bitter gourd), tendli, grapes, money plant (Pothos species),
betel plant, madhumalti (Quisqualis indica), railway creeper (Ipomoea palmata) ...
A creeper grows along the ground.
The two words "climber" and "creeper" may refer to the same kind of plant, though some
plants which grow heavy fruit, like watermelon and pumpkins, need to grow or creep
horizontally rather than climb.
Where have you seen climbers or creepers? Have you seen climbers growing on other
trees? on fences? Why do you think climbers are grown on fences?

Activity 4.5: Act out a scene in which some of you pretend to be trees, shrubs, climbers

and creepers. A few of you can be animals or people in this scene.

Activity 4.6: Draw a field or a garden with lots of plants - see that you have many different

kinds of them!!
Plants are so useful!
Plants make the air fresh for us to breathe. Without plants we would not be alive!
Have you watched animals eating the leaves of plants? Which animals have you seen
visiting or eating plants? Which plants were they?
Which trees around you give a nice, large shade that you like to sit in? Which trees do you
like to climb or play under?
Find out some plants of which people use, wood, leaves, flowers, fruits or anything else. Find
out about a plant which is used as a medicine. What part of it is used?
Find any poems, stories, legends or beliefs relating to plants.
27
5. Parts of plants
Just like we have different parts like hands, legs ... plants too have different
parts. These parts are useful to the plant in some way.
Stem or Trunk
The stem of a plant is long and green or brown in colour. The stem supports
branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. The stem keeps the plant standing
straight.
The stem of a tree is called a trunk. We get wood from the trunk of trees.
Wood is used for making furniture (desks, cupboards ...).
Name some other things made from wood. Show some things in this
classroom which are made from wood.
Look at the stem of a shrub, creeper or climber and the trunk of a tree. Are
they similar or different? Touch each stem or trunk and describe it: what is
its colour? Is it smooth or rough? Soft or hard? The stem of a creeper may
look weak. Do you think it may break easily? Do you see any juice or
gum on the stem? Any insects on it?

Activity 5.1: Bark rubbing

Materials needed: A blank unruled piece of paper, pencil or crayon.
Hold the paper against the bark of the tree and gently shade with a pencil or
crayon. The pattern of the bark will form on the paper. Rub over barks of
different trees and compare these patterns. Make a display of different bark
rubbings.
(See also Small Science Class 3 Teacher's Book, pages 45-46 ).
Notice the colour and designs on the bark. Can you recognise the tree by
seeing only the trunk?
Activity 5.2: Collect pieces of bark that might be peeling off a tree.
Exhibit the barks along with the names of the trees.
The stem and branches of some plants are covered with thorns or spines.
Do you know any such plants?
Roots
The roots of a plant usually grow below the ground. They help to keep the
plant fixed in the same place.
28
Uproot a small weed and look at its roots.
Large trees have thick roots which spread wide and go deep under the ground. You cannot
see roots that go deep down but sometimes you may see a few roots above the ground, at some
distance away from the tree, or on the side of a road which is cut through a hill. The banyan
tree has also special roots which grow out from the branches and down into the ground.
Have you seen any other plants with roots that are seen above the ground,
like some palm trees, jowar ...?
Leaves

Activity 5.3: Compare two leaves from two different plants.

Find as many differences between them as you can. Describe
the shape of the two leaves, compare their sizes, colour, texture,
how they are arranged on the plant.
Two leaves with visibly different types of shapes could be compared,
for example, the leaves of railway creeper (Ipomoea palmata) and
Indian almond or desi badam (Terminalia catappa).
Colour: What is the colour of these two leaves? Even if both are green,
are they of the same shade of green? Do some plants have leaves of other colours too?
These may be shades or patterns of green, yellow, red, brown, purple, pink ... Croton,
Tradescantia species, Rhoea discolor have leaves of several different colours.
Are the tiny young leaves of these plants of a different colour from the older leaves? What is
the colour of the old leaves? Of dried leaves?
What happens to leaves after they become dry? Do you think that the leaves that are now
on the tree were there last year too? Look for leaves fallen on the ground - what is their colour?
Compare them with fresh leaves.
Young leaves of mango, peepal and mast tree or false ashoka (Polyalthia longifolia) are
reddish-brown and shiny. As they grow they become green. Later they turn yellow or brown.
The exact sequence and colours may differ for each plant.
Shape: Describe differences in shape of the two leaves.
Leaves can be of so many different shapes. Some are broad, while some
are thin and long. Leaf of the railway creeper is shaped like a star or a
butterfly while that of Indian almond is oval or like a person's head.
(These descriptions were given by children of Class 2.)
Texture: How do the leaves feel when you touch them?
Some leaves are smooth while some are rough like those of teak, bokeda
(Ficus hispida) and parijat. Some are even hairy, like the leaves of tomato
and Mussaenda.
29
Look at the leaf near a window or in sufficient sunlight. Does it look shiny?
The shoeflower leaf is a shiny, dark green but the aboli leaf is a dull green.
Edges: Some leaves have smooth edges, others have wavy or zig-zag edges.
Veins: Have you noticed the lines in a leaf, they are veins. Veins give shape to
the leaf. They can be seen as designs or patterns on the leaf. Try to copy these
patterns. Look for the different patterns of veins in leaves. Compare the veins
in palak and methi leaves. Now compare with the pattern on the grasses.
Palak leaves have prominent branched veins. In methi leaves, only the vein in the centre
(midrib) is seen. In grasses the veins are parallel rather than being branched.
Arrangement of leaves on the stem: Are the leaves arranged in a bunch or are they single?
Do you see some pattern or design in the way the leaves are arranged? Try to draw the patterns.
Examples: copper pod, mango, papaya trees.

Activity 5.4: Look at a leaf given to you. Notice its colour and shape.

Feel it between your fingers. Touch the upper and lower surfaces of
the leaf, do they feel the same? Is the colour of the leaf same on both
the sides? Look at the patterns on it. Run your finger along its edges.
Describe in your own words how the leaf looks and feels. Does it
have any smell?

Activity 5.5: Bring different kinds of leaves to the class. Arrange them from the

smallest to the largest.
Example of such an arrangement : tulsi, mango, badam, banana
Sort the leaves into those having similar edges, shades, feel or design on leaves.

Activity 5.6: Observe and draw a few different leaves. Write one or two

words to tell how a leaf is different from the others.

Activity 5.7: Leaf rubbing

Materials needed: Leaves, a blank sheet of paper, pencil or crayon.
Press the paper over the back of a leaf with prominent veins, and shade
over the paper gently. The pattern of the leaf will show up on the paper. Compare the
patterns made with leaves of different plants. Make a display of your leaf rubbings.

Activity 5.8: Look how the leaves tear!

Tear different leaves of various plants. Notice any difference in the way they tear. How
does the leaf of a grass tear? Try to explain why different leaves tear in different ways.
The grass leaf tears into straight strips but the leaf of a shrub tears in a
zig-zag line. This observation could be used to draw attention to the
veins or lines on the leaves which are peculiarly parallel in grasses and
in palm leaflets (monocotyledonous plants).
30
Bring to class some leaves that we can eat. What are their names? Do you wash these
leaves before eating? Do you need to cook them?
The class may share a snack consisting of edible leaves. Rural and tribal communities in India
know of a large variety of edible leaves. Children in these communities too are highly
knowledgeable about edible leaves, flowers, fruit and seeds. The class may make a display of
edible leaves.
Take Care
Do not eat any leaf unless you know it is safe!
Flowers
A flower is usually the most colourful part of a plant, with a
pleasant smell too! Remember some flowers - describe their
colours, shapes, sizes and smells. Recall flowers that grow
on large trees and those that grow on smaller plants.
Which are your favourite flowers? Why do you like these
flowers?

Activity 5.9: Watch a flower bloom

Keep a potted flowering plant in the class, close to a
window where it will get plenty of sunlight. Remember to
water it every day! Tie a piece of coloured thread loosely around the stem of a bud or a
flower. Watch the flower every day and tell the class what changes you see.
This activity may be done with the thread tied to the stem below any growing part of the plant.
In this way students will be able to observe the plant grow from day to day.
What differences can you see in these two pictures?

Activity 5.10: Bring some different flowers to the class. Do you know the names of

these flowers?
The most colourful and prominent part of a flower are the petals. Look at the colours of the
petals. Count the number of petals. What is the shape of each petal?
Tie a thread
around the
stalk of a bud
on a lemon
tree.
After five days, the
lemon bud blooms into
a flower, while the
flower is replaced by
a tiny lemon fruit.
31
Besides drawing, children may describe the shape in words. Some examples given by
students of Class 2: like a hand, half-moon shaped, wavy, smooth, zig-zag, crooked, flat ...
In some flowers the petals may be all joined together, like the flower of the railway creeper.
Sort the flowers into groups according to their colour. Sorting could also be done according to
size, number of petals or whether the flowers have any smell.
Have you been near a place with jasmine plants? Think of some other flowers with strong
(pleasant or unpleasant) smells.
Some flowers, like jasmine, parijat have a strong smell that you can detect even from a distance.
Do you know any flowers which smell strongest in the night?
night jasmine, tuberose or nishigandha
Which are the flowers whose smells you do not like?
The response would depend on individual preference, but examples
could be baobab (Adansonia digitata) and thorn apple (Sterculia foetida).
Think of some flowers with mild or almost no smell.

Activity 5.11: Guess the flower from the smell

Materials needed: Petals of some common flowers with characteristic smells.
Examples: rose, marigold, jasmine, champa (Plumaria species) ...
To make things more interesting, the petals of the various flowers could be torn into small
pieces. It would be better if the flower petals were all of the same colour (but the flowers
were actually from different plants), so that it would be difficult to distinguish them by the
colour. Each student would get a few bits of the petals, and be asked to identify the flower
based on smell alone.
Which is the smallest flower that you have seen? How small was it?
Compare the size of this flower with something of similar size.
Which is the biggest flower that you have seen? How big was it?
Plants like coriander, mango, neem and most of the grasses have very small flowers. On the
other hand, plants like lotus and canna have large flowers. Some plants get many tiny
flowers in bunches. Some get only a few big flowers.
Can we cook and eat any flower?
We eat cauliflower, and also the flowers of pumpkin, drumstick, banana and neem. The
petals of some flowers (like the rose, tamarind and mahua) can even be eaten raw. Rose petals
preserved in sugar (gulkand) are said to have medicinal value.
Take Care
Never eat a flower unless you know that it is safe!
32
Have you seen bees or butterflies visiting flowers? Watch and guess what they do there. You
might also see some small insects crawling into flowers. Are some flowers visited more often
by insects?
Some flowers like aboli, sadaphuli, parijat have hollow stalks (you can insert a pin into one
end of the stalk and see it coming out from the other end).

Activity 5.12: Paint with petals and leaves

Materials needed: coloured flowers, paper.
Holi is the festival of colours. Holi colours can be made using dyes from leaves and petals of
flowers. Petals and leaves can also be used for colouring on paper.
Rub the leaves and petals directly on paper to make colourful paintings.
Give each student a few leaves and some petals of different flowers. Get them to wash
hands properly after the activity. Examples of some leaves and flowers that could be used:
Leaves:
henna or mehndi (Lawsonia inermis) : green
goldmohar or gulmohar (Delonix regia) : green
bougainvillea : pink, peach, orange - the bracts of the bougainvillea flower are used
for painting. (A bract is a modified leaf which is found just below the flower or a
group of flowers, above the stalk of the flower(s).)
Flowers:
flame of the forest or palash or dhak (Butea frondosa / Butea monosperma) : red, orange
gulmohar (Delonix regia) : red
marigold or genda (Tagetes erecta) : yellow, orange
shoeflower (Hibiscus rosasinensis) : purple
copper pod (Peltophorum inerme) : yellow
coral tree or pangara (Erythrina species) : red
rose or gulab (Rosa species) : red, yellow
chitrak (Plumbago zeylanica) : blue
chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum indicum) : yellow
Indian laburnum (Cassia fistula) : yellow
parijat (Nyctanthes arbor-tristis) - tubes are used : orange

Activity 5.13: Join the dots, guess the flower

Materials needed: The outline of a flower in the form of serially numbered dots.
Join the dots with a pencil following the order of the numbers. Now try and guess which
flower it is.
The activity is fun. It also provides practice in reading numerals in correct order.
33

Activity 5.14: Pressing flowers and leaves

Materials needed: Flowers (preferably medium-sized), for example, Ixora coccinea, phlox,
firecracker flower or aboli (Crossandra undulaefolia), shoeflower, flowers of grasses, leaves, old
newspapers and books, chart paper.
Spread the flower or leaf in such a way that you can see most of it. Press it gently between the
folds of a sheet of newspaper, taking care not to crumple the petals of the flower too much.
Keep a book over the newspaper to keep it pressed. The flower or leaf will slowly dry up.
Change its position every few days, till it is completely dry. Now you may take the flower or
leaf out of the newspaper. Glue one or several of these on to a card paper or paper and use it
as a decorative piece or convert it into a greeting card.
When a flower or leaf is just plucked from a plant, it is fresh. After a while it droops and fades.
How could we keep it looking nice even if it is not fresh?
Flowers and leaves may stay fresh for a few extra days if we keep their stems in water. If dried
properly they will keep their shape, though the colour may change. Why do we press
flowers to preserve them? To preserve means to retain the features of that object even after it
dies or fades. Try keeping the flower without pressing and see what happens.

Activity 5.15: Spatter or spray patterns

Place a pressed flower or leaf on a blank sheet of paper. With the help of an old toothbrush
spray water-colour around the flower or leaf without disturbing it. When the colour dries
remove the flower or leaf.

Activity 5.16: Make a rangoli with flowers

This activity may be done in groups in a convenient open space. Alternatively, each student
may make a small rangoli pattern on a sheet of cardboard.
Materials needed: flowers of different colours, chalk.
Draw a rangoli design on the floor with a piece of chalk. You may think of your own design
or get one from a book. Use flower petals to fill in the pattern.
Remember, do not pluck too many flowers from the plant!!
You may be able to find fallen flowers nearby which
have not dried up completely - use them for the rangoli.
Fruits
Some flowers grow into fruits. Have you seen a mango tree
in bloom? A few days or a week later, you might have seen
the whole tree bearing several tiny mango fruits. Fruits of many
plants are tasty to eat like, guava, mango, grapes and coconut.
34
Do all plants, shrubs and trees have fruits? Does the rose plant too have fruits?
Which fruit trees have you seen? Look for fruits of as many plants as you can. Some fruits
may be shaped like beans! Look for seeds in all the fruits.
Can the fruits of all plants be eaten? Are there fruits that other animals eat but we do not?
Take Care
Never eat a fruit unless you know that it is safe! Wash fruits well before eating them.
More on fruits in the Topic 9, pages 52 to 54.

Activity 5.17: Drawing and colouring

Observe a plant (as described in Topic 4). Draw a leaf, a flower and the whole plant. See
if your drawings resemble the real plant: is the overall size and shape of the plant in your
drawing, similar to the plant that you have seen? How thick or thin is the stem? Are there
patterns on the stem? For leaves check out the size, shape, margin, pattern of veins and
arrangement of leaves on the stem. For flowers check the shape, number of petals and
their colours.

Activity 5.18: Your own collection - Nature journal

Materials required: a scrap-book or fullscape sheets of paper, gum.
On the way to school or when you go out for a walk, collect different kinds of leaves that catch
your attention - large and small, of various colours, shapes or pattern of veins. Collect flowers
too which you would like to keep with you and look at later on. Press them within sheets of
newspaper (as described in Activity 5.14); stick them in your scrap-book. As far as possible,
collect fallen or dry material. You may also pick up fallen seeds, pods or twigs. If you know
the plant from which you got the material write its name below the preserved material.
A chart could also be made using pressed flowers and leaves.

Activity 5.19: Note the seasonal changes in the plants on the calendar of that month.

The calendar activity is described in Topic 18, pages 84-85. The following observations are
best done as part of this activity. Students will be able to answer these questions only after
repeated observations over several months.
While you are walking outdoors, or on your way to school, get into the habit of watching the
trees and plants around you. Do you see flowers on all plants? Do you see flowers on these
same plants throughout the year? Notice which months of the year you see particular kinds
of flower(s) blooming. In which months do you not see them?
Watch also what is there on the ground below the trees. At times, under some trees like
peepal and desi badam you might see fallen leaves, under the copper pod and gulmohar
trees you might see fallen flowers or parts of fallen flowers. Under the trees of banyan (Ficus
bengalensis), peepal (Ficus religiosa) and umbar (Ficus glomerata) you might see fallen fruits.
35
Have you seen a tree with no leaves at all? When have you seen it that way? Later in the
year did new leaves grow on that tree?
Have you seen a tree full of flowers but with no leaves?
Each festival in the month is depicted in the calendar with the help of a symbol. Pictures of
related plants - the whole plant, flower or fruit, could be used to depict a festival or the
seasonal changes during that time. For example, towards the season of Vasant Panchami, the
mango trees start to get their spring bloom. These flowers may be drawn to depict the new
season of spring.
Children's observations about some plants
1. Children of Classes 1 and 2 were asked to observe and draw these plants. (The terms
below are translated from spoken Marathi child language.)
What is observed shoeflower
Leaf shiny, smooth
Leaf margin zig-zag
Colour of flower red
Number of petals five
Any other structure (staminal) tube
Petals
aboli
Leaf rough
Leaf margin zig-zag
Colour of flower orange and yellow
Number of petals three
Petals very soft
The students seemed a bit confused about the number of petals in aboli, since the shape of the
petals was rather misleading.
2. Comparison between two shrubs (shoeflower and periwinkle):
shoeflower periwinkle
Flower colour red pink
Leaf colour dark green light green
Leaf margin serrated smooth
Size of leaf broad narrow
Size of the flower big small
Leaf texture shiny not shiny
Other structures (staminal) tube none
Student’s
Drawing
36
3. Comparison between a shrub and a tree
(shoeflower and mango tree):
shoeflower mango
Plant shrub tree
Leaves smaller bigger
rough smooth
Flowers red, big yellow, small
not in bunch in a bunch
4. Comparison between a creeper and a tree (railway creeper and Indian almond):
railway creeper Indian almond
Plant creeper/ climber tree
Size of the leaf small big
Shape of the leaf butterfly, star man's head, oval
Texture of the leaf not shiny shiny
Veins not prominent prominent
5. Comparison between leaves of two plants (mango leaves and copper pod leaflets):
mango copper pod
Size large small
Colour parrot green green
Texture ironed out not ironed out
shiny not shiny
Veins prominent only middle vein seen
Leaf stalk green brown
Tip of leaf pointed rounded
New words
trunk, bark, veins, stalk, preserve, petals, margin, texture, symbol
Student’s Drawings
37
6. animals around us
In this topic students observe some common small and large
animals. You may select particular animals which are found in
your local environment, or animals of folk cultural, religious,
mythological or social interest, or some that might hold
fascination for your children for any other reason. If occasionally
you come across pictures and information on exotic animals like
tigers or whales, or if students have a chance to visit a zoo or a sanctuary or watch a nature
program, then you might take up these more unusual animals for discussion and activities.
Here is a list of familiar animals to select from: dog, cat, goat, sheep, cow, buffalo, squirrel,
mouse, monkey, elephant, sparrow, crow, hen, pigeon, parakeet, myna, bulbul, lizard,
chameleon, snake, frog, fish, snail, clam, earthworm, leech, crab, prawn, lice, scorpion,
spider, millipede, caterpillar, fly, flea, mosquito, butterfly, bee, ant, cockroach, termite,
grain-weevil, grasshopper, cricket, firefly, dragonfly, bedbug, ladybug, beetle ...
As in the other topics, these questions and activities should stimulate students to go back to
their environment and observe closely. Some questions may be answerable from previous
experience while others would need further observations.
Watch out for animals!

Activity 6.1: Observe these two animals. Notice the differences between them. Notice

also the similarities.
This exercise will arouse students' curiosity and initiate them into observing and thinking
about animals. Choose any two familiar and somewhat similar animals for comparison,
say a dog and a cow, a sparrow and a pigeon, or a bee and an ant. Wherever feasible this
exercise should be done with the animals actually present in front of the children.
General questions to be asked about any specific animal:
Where have you seen (this animal)? What have you seen it doing?
Children observe animals in the neighbourhood more closely than we adults do. You might
be surprised at the things they notice!
What is the colour of the animal? How big is it? Does it have hair? Does it have feathers
or scales? How many legs? Horns? (Especially for birds and insects) does it have wings?
How many?
Where does it live? Does it make its own house?
What food does it eat? Does any other animal eat this animal?
What do you like or dislike about this animal?
Have you seen the young one of this animal? What is it called (in case it has a special name)?
38

Activity 6.2: Act like this animal. Move like it and make the same sounds that it makes.

The class might act out a story or poem containing one or several animals.

Activity 6.3: Make a model of this animal using materials from your surroundings.

Some ideas for making models are given later for specific animals.
Blackboard work: Tail the donkey.
Draw a large picture of an animal on the blackboard, the animal missing one body part, as in
a donkey without a tail. Students will take turns to be blindfolded and try to draw the tail of
the donkey ... or ears of a rabbit ... or horns of a cow ... or tail of a peacock ...
Dogs
Do you like dogs? Or are you afraid of them? They will not do you any harm if you do not
harm them ... but keep away from unknown stray dogs and guard dogs!
Which different kinds of dogs have you seen? Describe different types, their colours, sizes,
hair, tail, ears, etc.
If you have a pet dog at home, tell the class about it - its name, what it eats, how it plays, etc.
If you have stray dogs in your neighbourhood tell the class about them.
What foods does your dog like best, what foods does
it never eat? What foods do dogs eat but we cannot?
Describe a dog's teeth - how are they different from ours?
When have you seen a dog wagging its tail, putting its
tail between its feet, using the tail for anything else?
39

Activity 6.4: Imitate different actions of a dog in various situations.

Have you seen dogs fall sick or hurt themselves - how do they take care of themselves? In a
way different from us? Do dogs take care of other dogs? Have you heard of doctors for animals?
Snakes
Snakes may not be familiar animals but they are often well-known through myth, legend,
ritual and via "snake charmers". Students are usually curious to find out more about snakes.
Have you seen a snake? Where? ... etc. Do you know that there are many different kinds
of snakes?
Do you like snakes? Are you afraid of them? Why?

Activity 6.5: Make a drawing of a snake and colour it.

Show pictures of snakes to give an idea of colours and patterns.
Activity 6.6: Make a model of a snake. You might use modelling clay (plasticine), or wire,
or cloth, or you may start with two thin long strips of paper and fold them into each-other.
A paper model of a cobra is shown.
Act like a snake. Show how the snake moves. Do snakes make any sound? What sound
do they make?
Does a snake have legs or arms?
Snakes have no legs, yet they can move very fast; they have no arms, yet most snakes can
climb trees!
Where do snakes live? Does a snake make its own hole?
Snakes cannot dig. They live inside rock crevices or unused ant mounds, or in tunnels made
by rats or other burrowing animals.
40
What do snakes eat?
Snakes eat small animals like mice, frogs and small birds. They can open their mouths wide
and swallow animals that might be four or five times the size of their own head! Snakes
smell with the help of their tongue.
Do all snakes bite? What happens if a snake bites us? What will you do if a snake bites
someone?
The snake might be poisonous, so get help immediately! The injured person should lie down
and try not to move; (s)he should be carried or transported to the nearest hospital. In the
meanwhile tie a piece of cloth tightly on the part above the wound so that the poison does not
flow to other parts of the body. Loosen the cloth periodically to let blood flow.
If snake-bites are common in the locality then these instructions would need to be more
elaborate, especially for older students. Tying of a cloth tourniquet should also be
demonstrated.
Snakes are useful to us! They eat mice which eat our crops and foodgrains.
Some common misconceptions about snakes
1. Snakes drink milk. (No!)
Snakes never drink milk. Snakes cannot digest milk. If they are forced to drink milk they could
die of a stomach-upset. Out of sheer ignorance a very cruel practice is prevalent during the
festival of Nagpanchami: snakes, especially cobras, are captured and milk is force-fed to them.
This practice should be stopped.
2. Snakes bite to take revenge. (No!)
Snakes do bite us, but out of fear - not to take revenge for any past deeds! If you are in an
area with snakes it is best to carry a stick, banging it on the ground to warn snakes you are
there, so that they will keep out of your path.
3. All snakes are poisonous. (No!)
Most kinds of snakes are not poisonous.
Place of snake-bite
41
4. Snakes inject poison through their tongue. (No!)
Poisonous snakes have two big teeth or fangs in the front of their jaws. These teeth are hollow
and are connected to glands filled with poison. Non-poisonous snakes do not have these fangs.
5. Snakes have many heads. (No!)
In stories and legends you might have heard of snakes with many heads. You might also
have seen such snakes in fantasy programs on TV. Such snakes do not exist in reality!
6. Snakes dance to music. (No!)
Snakes do not have ears, so they cannot hear music. But they can feel the vibrations on the
ground. They do move to the movements of any object in front of them (stick, cloth, been ...)
that the snake charmer or sapera moves.
Birds
General questions on birds:

Activity 6.7: Watch for birds in your surroundings. They

might be free birds or birds which are kept on a farm or as pets.
Do you think any bird would like to live in a cage?
Which birds have you seen? Which birds do you know?
Activity 6.8: Observe any two birds. Notice the differences between them. Notice also
the similarities.
How many legs do birds have? Wings? What body parts do birds have but we do not?
(feathers, wings, beak, tail) What body parts do we have that birds do not? (hair, nose ...)
What body parts do we have in common with birds?
Do all birds have similar beaks? Do they chew their food, do they have teeth?
Have you seen the nest of a bird? Where? Have you seen eggs of birds? Baby birds? Where?
Do they look like the parent birds? Can they fly?
Bite marks
of a
poisonous snake
Bite marks
of a
non-poisonous snake
42

Activity 6.9: Collect feathers of birds, pieces of eggshell and old unused nests. Try to guess

which birds they belong to.
Never disturb a nest which is being used by a bird! Never steal eggs from a nest!
Have you or anyone you know taken care of a bird in trouble? How?

Activity 6.10: Bring from home two halves of an eggshell. Make a small chick - out of

paper or some other material - to put inside your egg.
Some birds that you know
What is the colour of (this bird)? Is it the same colour all
over the body? Any coloured patterns? What is the colour
of the legs and beak? Is the beak short or long, blunt or
pointed, straight or curved?
Does it walk? How?
The hen moves its neck back and forth at each step, the
sparrow hops ...
Does it fly? How?
Flapping its wings rapidly or slowly, noisily or silently, soaring high, gliding ...
What food does it eat? Does it carry food in its claws or its beak? Show how it eats.
Have you ever fed this bird?
Some birds eat grains and fruit, some eat insects or larger animals, some eat only dead animals.
Some small birds like sunbirds drink the nectar of flowers. Swifts feed on insects while flying.
Sparrows and hens pick up foodgrains with their beak, a crow
holds its food under its claws and tears it with the beak, bee-eaters
sit on a high wire and make short flights to catch flying insects ...
What sound does this bird make? Imitate the sound.
Do you see or hear this bird always? Do you hear its sound
only at some times of the day? Or during a particular season?
Do you usually see this bird singly, in pairs, in small or in large groups?
Do you know where it stays? Where does it build its nest?
Have you seen it building a nest? How does it carry the nest materials?
How does the nest look? What is it made of? Is it different from nests of other birds you know?

Activity 6.11: Collect material like grass, twigs, cotton-wool and feathers. Use them to make

a nest of your own. You might try to make a nest exactly like one made by a bird, using the
same materials that the bird used. You might put your model eggs of Activity 6.10 inside the nest.
43
Ants

Activity 6.12: Select a garden or a yard. Put some jaggery, nuts or fried food (any sweet

or oily food) in a place where ants could be expected - say near an ant hill. You might also
do this activity indoors where ants might be wandering. See how quickly one ant and soon
many ants find the food and start to carry it to their home. Watch the ants closely. Be
careful they do not climb up your legs and bite you!
Watch for lines of ants. What do you seen them carrying?
Ants carry dead insects or their body parts, sweet foods, seeds ... occasionally you may see a
group of ants moving house, carrying identical white eggs and babies in their mouths. You
might see a single ant carrying a piece of food or a group of ants together hauling a large
piece of food. An ant can carry things 50 times its own body weight!
See Small Science Class 3: TextBook pages 16-17, WorkBook page 23 and Teacher's Book
pages 64-65 for more information on this activity.
Have you seen ants of different sizes and colours, or ants with wings? Describe the types of
ants you have seen. Do you know if all of them bite?
Where do ants live?
Ant homes may look like a small hillock, or they might be completely under the ground; they
might even be located inside the walls of your own house! The ant home is like a palace with
many passages and rooms. There is a queen ant, worker ants and drones. The queen ant stays
indoors and lays eggs from which young ants come out. The worker ants take care of the queen
and young ants - they find and bring food, they build and repair the home, keep it clean and
guard it by biting intruders.
Have you been bitten by an ant? Describe how it feels.
Ants use their jaws to cut the food and carry it, and also to attack intruders - ants bite with their
strong jaws.
How many legs does an ant have?
All insects have six legs - three pairs. Ants also have small feelers which help them find food
and communicate, or "talk" with each other.

Activity 6.13: Draw an ant. Draw a line of ants carrying food.

Find a story or legend about ants - example, the ant
and the pigeon - ant drowning in water - pigeon sees
and drops a leaf - ant climbs on it and is saved -
some days later, ant sees a hunter aiming gun at the
pigeon - bites him - he loses aim - pigeon flies off
hearing the sound and is thus saved in turn. Another
example is the story of the ant and the grasshopper.
44
Some other insects
Imitate the sounds made by a honey bee, a bumble bee, a mosquito,
a fruit fly, a cricket.
Bees, mosquitoes and flies make buzzing or whining sounds by
flapping their wings rapidly. Crickets rub their wings against
their legs to make loud scraping sounds.

Activity 6.14: Make a terrarium.
See Small Science Class 3 Teacher's Book, pages 68 to 72.

Activity 6.15: Catch a cockroach, keep it in a glass jar and observe it. Watch how it
moves and what it eats. Try to catch a mosquito or a fly and observe it in the same way.

Activity 6.16: Find a caterpillar. Keep it in a box with holes. Feed it every day with fresh
leaves from the plant on which you found it. Watch for some surprising things to happen!

Activity 6.17: Fold a piece of paper into half. Draw half of a butterfly on the side where
the paper is folded. Tear carefully along the outline of the wings. Open the fold and you
have the complete butterfly. Make it colourful by sticking bits of paper in different colours
in a collage.
Animals that live in water
Students should carry out observations of any water animals that
might be found in the locality like, fish, frogs, crabs, snails, clams, etc.
Particularly in the monsoon season even in inland areas there are
marshes, puddles and ponds where water animals are easy to find.
See Small Science Class 4 Teacher's Book, pages 202 to 219. Books
and films on exotic undersea animals might also be available.

Activity 6.18: Take some water from a pond and keep it in a glass
bowl on a window sill. Watch what happens over several days.
You may see some tiny floating plants in the water. Chances are that a mosquito will lay its
eggs in the water and students will be able to watch tiny larvas and pupas of mosquitoes.
See the story in Small Science Class 4 TextBook, page 56.
Find out why mosquitoes are dangerous to us.
When some types of mosquitoes bite us, we get terrible diseases like malaria, filaria, dengue
and Japanese encephalitis.
Find out what we can do to stop the increase of mosquitoes.
Mosquitoes lay eggs in stagnant water. So do not allow water to collect in puddles and
ditches! Keep storage water and sewers covered. In large ponds keep frogs and fish that eat
up larvas and pupas of mosquitoes.