Our food 3
7. Foodgrains
8. Vegetables
9. Fruits
10. Food from animals
46
The aim of this section is to stimulate curiousity
about the large variety of foodgrains, vegetables,
fruits and meats eaten by people. Cleanliness
of food is also emphasised.
Children in classes 1 and 2 are likely to have been
exposed to only a limited number of foodstuffs.
Our typical diets may be restricted by availability,
taste, fashion, custom or dogma. In our varied
culture there also exist misunderstandings and negative attitudes among different groups of
people about diets of other communities. Discussions suggested here should help students
become more aware, informed, interested and open-minded about food.
Open-minded yes, but teachers may notice that
there is no mention here of commercially
processed, packaged and "fast" foods. This
deliberate omission comes from a judgement
of desirability from a health, environmental and
economic perspective. If the topic of processed
foods does come up, please discuss it in the local
context but do not fail to endorse the superiority
of fresh foods in our everyday diet.
The greater part of our diet is normally made up from foodgrains, after which come
vegetables, fruits and meats. That is therefore the order in which these topics have been
discussed here. It may be better however, in actual teaching, to introduce foods with the
simple and familiar topic of "fruits" (Topic 9, page 52).
Cereals
A few days before starting the topic ask students to collect different kinds of cereals like, rice,
wheat, jowar, bajra, ragi or nachani, corn or maize, barley, oats. Introduce the word "cereals"
at the time of giving these instructions. The discussion below assumes that student have
brought these cereals to the class and have also found out some of their names.
Include in the samples some whole grains of rice or wheat with the seed cover still on them
They will be useful for the planting activity. If possible also bring leaves and ears of cereals,
or even a whole plant.
How many of you have eaten these - rice, chapati, roti, phulka, bread, pav, bhakri, makki-kiroti,
mudda, naan, paratha, puri, ghavana, amboli, pulav, khichdi ...?
Ask this question for local staple cereal food item. Write 3 or 4 familiar names in one column
on the left of the blackboard.
Do you know what each of these is made of? Like, chapati is made from wheat (flour).
7. Foodgrains
47
Go through the names on the left, writing on the right of the board the corresponding list of
cereals. Collect the samples of cereals brought by students. A few grains of each cereal can
be given to each child.
How do these cereals look?
Students describe the appearance, colour, shape and
(comparative) grain-size of each of the cereals. Sample responses -
Grain Colour Shape
Wheat yellow, light brown, golden Oval, has a line
Bajra grey, yellow tip triangle
Jowar yellow, black tip like Bajra, but larger
Maize yellow, white tip like Bajra, larger still

Activity 7.1: Close your eyes and guess the cereals by touch.

Activity 7.2: Have you seen the plants on which these cereals grow? Let's plant these
whole grains and see.
The sprouting seeds and plants will have to be watered daily for several weeks. If possible a
full-grown plant of any cereal should also be shown to the students.
All cereal plants are types of grasses!
This observation would be an outcome of the planting activity.
Observe the leaves and "ears" of some common grasses and the "ears" of some cereals.
In these ears, observe that the grains are seeds in fruits, one in each.
Can you eat cereals raw?
They are hard, do not have much taste. Your stomach may ache if you eat too much of
raw foodgrains.
Find out some more things cooked from cereals - try to name the cereals used.
upma or uppita, halwa or sheera, dosa, idli, uttapam, appam (from
Tamilnadu, Kerala, etc.), mudda or mudde (from Andhra and
Karnataka - balls made from bajra and ragi flour), khakra, thepla
(from Gujarat) thalipeeth, pohe (from Maharashtra), noodles,
popcorn, kurmure, macaroni, spaghetti, pizza, cornflakes, cake,
kheer, porridge ... ragi and barley are used to prepare malt.
Some of these preparations contain pulses too.
At every meal do you eat at least one thing cooked from a cereal?
Is there any meal at which you do not eat ANYTHING made out
of a cereal?
Cereals are necessary for us to live. They give us energy.
48
It is important to have some cooked cereal at every meal!
Exceptions might be meals with a tuber starch like sago, cassava or potato. Tuber starches
are staple food in parts of Kerala and in areas of Africa.

Activity 7.3: Make dough models
Ask students to bring a small quantity of any flour (preferably wheat). Make a dough out of
this flour and use it as clay for modelling. Steamed rice flour may be used instead of wheat
flour. A variety of models were made by students using moulded dough - Snake, faces (of
family members), cup, diya, mango, ice-cream cone, house, spectacles, bird's nest, bangles,
doll, penguin, modak, temple, rolling board and pin, tree, sun ...
Pulses
As done in the case of cereals, a few days in advance ask students to collect different kinds of
pulses like, arhar or tuar, udad, moong or mug, chana, groundnuts, masoor, math or matki, chavli,
vaal, soyabean, rajma, matar or vatana. Students may bring whole pulses or split pulses (dals).
Introduce the word "pulses" at the time of giving these instructions.
If possible also bring leaves and pods of pulses, or even a whole plant. Groundnut pods may
be easy to find, as also some pods and beans which are eaten tender like, peas, vaal, chavli or
french beans.
Which of these things do you eat - dal, sambhar, rasam, varan, amti or kattu or sharu, usal ... ?
Use names of local staple pulse food items. Write these
names in one column on the left of the blackboard.
Do you know which pulses these foods are made of?
Go through the list of foods on the left, writing on the right
of the board the corresponding names of pulses.
List some more pulses.
Collect the samples of pulses brought by students. Give a few
grains of each of these pulses to each student.

Activity 7.4: Close your eyes and guess the pulses just by touch.

Activity 7.5: Carefully rub a few grains of the whole pulse between
two flat, slightly rough surfaces, say your desk and a ruler. Look at
what is hidden under the skin of the pulse.
Students may find this task a little difficult to do - they might end up
crushing the whole seed. With luck and careful handling they might observe that when the
covering of the seed is removed it gets divided into two halves, each of which is called dal -
dals are made from fully ripened and dried pulses.
49
How do these pulses look?
Describe their appearance, colour, relative grain-size, etc.
Sample response -
"Moong is oval and rolls on the desk.",
After removing the skin and showing the moong dal -
"It is green from outside, yellow from inside."

Activity 7.6: Have you seen the plants on which these pulses grow? Let's plant some
whole pulses and see.
Water the seeds regularly. Notice that before sprouting the pulse grain swells up, its cover
splits open and the two halves turn green.
Are the pulse plants grasses like the cereals or different? Let's find out.
If possible also show a twig and a pod of a pulse.
Will the dals also grow into plants?
Try it and see
Find out some other things cooked from pulses.
List local pulse dishes. Some regional possibilities are, dhokla, idli, dosa, vada, dhirda or cheel,
undhiyo, dalvada, bhajia, gujjia, puranpoli, chakli, papad, bari or badiyan (used to make curry),
pessarattu (moong dosa), halwa (moong, udad), phutane, sweets like sone-papadi and mysore-pak ...
At every meal do you eat at least one thing cooked from a pulse?
Some non-vegetarian or milk meals (breakfast) may be exceptional.
It is important to have cooked pulses every day!
Pulses make us strong and help us grow. They also repair worn-out parts of our body - this last
idea is rather difficult for children to visualise.
Some of our other foods like, milk, egg, meat and fish also give us strength and help us grow.
Still, our body always needs pulses.

Activity 7.7: Stick various foodgrains on paper. Make designs, or simply write the names
of the foodgrains in front of them.
New words
cereals, pulses
50
A visit to the market before taking up this topic,
either with parents or along with the class would
make the students aware of the different varieties
of vegetables. Refer to Topic 12, page 63-64 for
more activities related to vegetables.
Vegetable variety
Which vegetables do you know? Which of these are leafy vegetables?
Write these names on the blackboard. Ask students to count the names in the list.
How many of these vegetables do you remember having eaten? Count again.
Choose a few local vegetables, keeping in mind variety in colour, size, shape, taste and use in
cooking. Example of a list: tomato, beetroot, potato, drumstick, beans, cabbage, chilli, onion.
You might also make a tabular form on the blackboard with a few column headings selected
from those suggested below.
Describe some of these common vegetables as follows:
"Name" of the vegetable
"Varieties" of the same vegetable (based on colour, size, taste ...)
"Taste": how does it taste when raw (if it can be eaten raw),
or when cooked?
"Touch" (soft, hard, rough, smooth, spiny or hairy)
"Skin" (thick or thin; does it have to be removed while cooking)
Food preparations or "Dishes" - what sabjis and other dishes can you make with this
vegetable? What spices are added to it while cooking?
What is the colour of the vegetable? Describe its shape - round, oval, long, like a cone,
irregular, with a stem ... Is it soft or hard? Does it have some smell? Does it have seeds inside?
Do you know that some vegetables grow under the ground? Can you find out one such
vegetable?
Yummy veggies
At home, watch and help when vegetables are prepared and cooked. What is the first thing
that we need to do before the vegetable is cooked?
Washing: hard vegetables should be scrubbed; soft vegetables should be washed gently but
thoroughly.
Why should the vegetables be washed?
To remove dirt, germs and chemicals on them. These often
cannot be seen but they make us sick if we eat them.

8. vegetables
51
Peeling: which vegetables need to be peeled? What tools are used for peeling? Is it difficult
to peel the skin of some vegetables? Can we eat some vegetables with the skin?
Cutting, chopping, grating etc: vegetables could be cut into
different shapes and sizes. What are the tools used for cutting?
Cooking makes food tastier and easy to digest. It kills germs.
Different ways of cooking vegetables: boiling, frying, steaming, roasting ... Processes of
grinding, mixing, mashing, stuffing ...
Children may know some implements used in cooking: stove, vessels of different kinds for
storing and cooking, ladles or spoons, grinding stones, pounding mortar, mixer - grinder,
oven ...

Activity 8.1: Eating vegetables keeps you healthy (you won't fall ill often). Eating all
vegetables is a very good habit - let us see which of you like to eat many kinds of
vegetables.
Name the vegetables one by one. Students draw an icon like a smiley on a paper if they
like it and draw a different icon or leave a blank if they dislike it. Or write a numbered
list of a few vegetables on the blackboard for students to copy and make their icons.

Activity 8.2: Vegetable printing
Vegetables like lady's finger (bhindi), french beans, potatoes and onions can be used for block
printing on paper using water colours. While some vegetables like bhindi have their own
distinct patterns, some others like potatoes are good with cut-out patterns. Beet has its own
colour which is adequate for printing on paper.
Students’ Drawings
52

A fruity snack

Ask each student to bring to class one small fruit or a piece of a
larger fruit. Tell them that at the end of the class, the fruits will
be shared among the whole class. Collect the fruits - ask each
student to name their fruit as they put it into the class collection.
What are the names of these fruits?
Write all or perhaps only the simpler of the names on the board and ask students to read the
list. Since there would be only a few names, this task should not be difficult. Many students
may "read" the names only approximately, or simply guess from the length of the word or by
recognition of a pattern.
Sort the fruits (keep those of one type together). Count the number of types of fruits.
Count how many of each type of fruit there are. Write this number on the blackboard next to
the name of the fruit. Add these numbers to get the total number of fruits.
Arrange some selected fruits in a line, from largest to smallest.

Activity 9.1: Some fruits are kept in a covered basket. One by one close your eyes, pick
out a fruit and try to guess what it is with the help of smell and touch.
Students may describe the size, weight, shape, texture and smell. More detailed questions, as
suggested in the next section, may also be asked here.

Activity 9.2: Pick up a fruit and wash it. Peel it (with some help) if necessary.
You may cut the fruit and mix the pieces together into a fruit-salad which everyone can
share. Add sugar if needed. Collect the seeds, wash and keep them for later observation.
Fruits of all kinds
Which different fruits do you know?
Depending on the level of literacy of the students, the entire list may be written on the
blackboard, or only a few of the simpler words may be written. The students could be asked to
read them and then count the total number.

Activity 9.3: Fold a sheet of paper as shown on page 64. Draw and colour one kind of fruit
in each box.
Choose a few locally available fruits to make the following observations.
Name the fruit, describe its colour and shape if possible.
Fruits have a covering or skin on them, called a "peel".
How is the peel to touch? Is it smooth, rough, spiny,
hard or soft? Is the peel of the same colour as the inside
of the fruit? Is the peel of the fruit eaten or not?

9. Fruits

53
Can the peel be easily removed with the fingers or do you need a knife to do it?
How does the fruit taste? Is it sweet, sour, bitter or anything else? Is the fruit soft or hard or
crunchy to chew? Is it juicy?
Does the fruit have seed(s)? How many (one, few, many)? What is their colour? Do you eat
the seeds or throw them away?
The seeds of the jackfruit are cooked and eaten. Sometimes we do not remove the seeds of
fruits like guava, pomegranate or tiny mangoes.
Do you see this fruit throughout the year or only in a particular season?
Some fruits may be preserved by drying, freezing or in some other way so that they are
available all through the year.
Name some big fruits. Name some very small fruits.
Which is the largest of the fruits you know? Which is the smallest? Arrange the following
groups of fruits from largest to smallest: . mango, lemon, grape, watermelon . papaya, jamun, jackfruit, orange . apple, pumpkin, awla, pineapple
The sorting can be done with the names written on the blackboard or
as given in the following Activity 9.4.

Activity 9.4: Tear the paper on which you have drawn fruits,
along the folds. You will have small cards with a fruit on each one.
Students may sort these cards according to taste (or texture, juiciness,
whether peel is eaten, number of seeds, etc.) and then count the
number of fruits in each category. Ordering by size may also be done here.
Which fruits can you eat cooked? Name some food items made from fruits.
Mango pulp or aamras, juice or squash or syrup (orange, sweetlime,
pinapple ...), milkshake, jam, fruit salad (apple, mango, strawberry,
chickoo ...), muramba or murabba, chhunda, pickle, chutney (raw mango, dates,
awla, lemon), chips (banana and jackfruit), ice-cream (strawberry, lichi,
custard apple ...), shikran (banana), aam-papdi (mango), fanas-papdi (jackfruit),
awla-supari (awla or gooseberry), raisins (grapes), candies or confections ...
Have you seen some fruit when it is raw - how is it different from a ripe fruit?
What happens if a fruit is kept for many days or when it becomes too ripe?
Can you eat it then?
That is why some fruits are preserved by drying or freezing or adding salt or sugar to make
pickles and murabba.
Student’s
Drawing
Student’s
Drawing
54

Activity 9.5: Guess in which fruit this seed was found!
Seeds collected from Activity 9.2 can be used here.
Name some fruits with big seeds. Name some fruits with white, black or brown seeds.
Arrange these seeds from biggest to smallest - lemon, mango, chickoo, banana ...
Make two groups of children. One group will describe a fruit or
the seeds of a fruit and the other group will try to guess the fruit.

Activity 9.6: Plant a seed.
Seeds of some suitable fruits could be planted to see them germinating
and growing into a tiny plant
If you plant a mango seed, which plant will you get?

Activity 9.7: Collect some seeds, like those of custard apple,
watermelon, chickoo. Draw a small circle on a flat surface. Hold
the seeds together in your hands, shake them and throw them gently
inside the circle. You are out if any seed goes out of the circle. Now with the forefinger drag
the seeds one by one out of the circle, taking care not to disturb the others, else you will be
out. If you have a mixture of different seeds, take out those of one type first and then
similarly the others. The player with the most number of seeds wins, so count your seeds
and find out the winner!

Activity 9.8: Find the favourite fruit.
Choose any four names of common fruits. Write them down one
below the other or draw a small picture of them. Ask some (about
ten) people, which of these they like the most. For each person,
draw a square in front of their choice or put a tick mark. Which
fruit is the favourite choice among the people you asked and
which is liked the least?
This can also be done for vegetables, flowers, plants, animals, vehicles ...
New words
peel, juicy, seasonal, raw, ripe.
Student’s
Drawing
Student’s
Drawing
55
We have so far talked about foodgrains,
vegetables and fruits. All these foods come
from, "are produced by", plants. They are
"plant products".
Do we get any foods from animals? Which
foods are these?
Milk, eggs, meat, honey - these foods are
"animal products".
Milk
Do you drink milk? Do you like to drink milk? Do you drink it hot or cold?
Milk is good food for children - it builds up your body, makes you grow tall and strong.
Does everyone in your house drink milk? If not milk then what else? Tea or coffee?
Is milk put into it?
Where does milk come from? Which animals give us milk?
Cow, buffalo, goat, sometimes camel, yak, llama, ass ...
Which foods are made from milk?
Curd or yoghurt, lassi, buttermilk, butter, ghee, paneer, cheese,
khoya or mawa or khawa, kharwas, shrikhand, sweets like pedha,
barfi, sandesh, rasagolla, ice cream, milkshakes, chocolates ...
Activity 10.1: Bring some milk or milk food to class.
Do you have in your home any animals from whom you
get milk? Which animals? Is this milk sold to anyone?
Students in rural areas may have experiences of keeping milch (milk-giving) cattle. They may
also know how a quantity of milk is measured. For semi-urban and urban areas the next few
questions would be more relevant.
Do you go somewhere to buy milk or does someone deliver milk to your house? Where do
they get the milk from?
Have you seen a milk delivery van? Have you seen milk tankers on trucks or trains?
In what way is the milk packed? Is it sold loose or in bottles or plastic sachets or tetrapaks?
If sold loose, how does the milk delivery person measure it out?
Find out - how much milk does a bottle, sachet or tetrapak hold?
Guess - how much milk do you think a tanker might hold?
Many thousands of litres! Around 2000 to 8000 litres.
10. food from animals
56
Do you need to buy milk every day? Could you buy milk and store it for a week (as you
may do for foodgrains)? Why or why not?
When you buy milk from a shop does it feel cold? How has it been kept cold? What would
happen if it remained warm?

Activity 10.2: Draw the containers and measuring cups, bottles, sachets and so on used for
delivering milk.

Activity 10.3: Collect milk bags or tetrapaks. Try to read what is written on them.
Students may be able to read the quantity, the brand name, whether it is cow milk or buffalo
milk or mixed; whole milk, low-fat or toned, etc.

Activity 10.4: Two half litre make one whole litre. Draw and show how many half litre
bags make up 1 litre, 2 litre ...
Blackboard work: How much milk?
As an alternative to the previous activity, you may draw the milk bags and ask how many
litres they make?
Eggs
Do you eat eggs? Do you like to eat eggs? Eggs too are good food for growing children.
Where do eggs come from?
Birds lay eggs. If a bird's egg is allowed to stay warm for a few days it
will hatch and out of it will come a baby bird. You might have seen a hen
sitting on her eggs to keep them warm. Eggs that we get in the market are
usually of the kind that do not produce baby birds.
Other animals that lay eggs are, fish, amphibians like frogs and salamanders, and reptiles like
snakes and lizards. Eggs of fish and frogs occur in bunches - each egg is very small. People
who eat fish may also eat the eggs of fish, which are called "roe".
Eggs of which birds are eaten by us?
Hen, duck, goose, turkey ... eggs of some wild birds too are eaten.
57
Describe an egg - how does it look, etc.
From the outside - descriptions may include shape, colour, texture, hardness, brittleness.
How does the inside of an egg look?
Describe white of egg, yolk of egg.
How are eggs eaten - what food preparations are made from eggs?
boiled, scrambled, poached, fried, omelette, bhurji, egg paratha, egg
french toast, egg curry ... eggs are also put in cakes, pastries, puddings ...
Have you seen how eggs are kept or stored in a shop?
In stacks using egg trays.
Activity 10.5: Bring some egg trays and several stones or marbles. Make up some games
using these.
Put one stone in each compartment of the tray. How many stones are there in the tray?
Now put two stones in each compartment. How many stones fit in the tray now?
How many eggs will fit in one tray? In two trays? In three trays? If there are two eggs less
in the tray how many eggs are there?
Meat
Do you eat meat? Do you like to eat meat?
Some families and people are vegetarians. They do not eat meat or eggs.
Meat is good for growing children, but there are also many plant foods like dals, groundnut
and sprouted pulses (also milk products) which help you grow big and strong.
Meat of which animals is eaten?
Chicken, goat, sheep, cow, buffalo, pigs, boar (wild pig) ... other wild animals are eaten by
some tribal communities.
Just like some people are vegetarians, others because of
their religious beliefs may not eat cow, buffalo or pig meat.
People often rear (take care of) animals which are useful.
These animals give milk, eggs or meat. They are called
"domestic animals". Domestic animals also include some
that provide transport, like ox and horse, and protection or
companionship, like dogs and cats.
Are some animals living in the water also eaten? Name
some of these animals.
Fish, prawn, crab, lobster, shrimp, clam, oyster, octopus ...
58
Are only some types of fishes eaten? Can you name types of fish that are commonly eaten?
River fish like rohu, magur, hilsa, catla, mrigal, trout; sea fish like pomfret, halwa, surmai, eel,
shark, bombil, bangda, tuna, also whales in some countries. Use local names of fishes.
How are fish caught from water? Have you seen a fish market?
Do you recognise the smell of fish?
In areas close to fishing communities or markets these
questions could be more detailed.

Activity 10.6: Bring to class a meat or a fish bone or a crab shell
which has been well washed and then dried in the sun for several days.
Honey
Have you eaten honey? Do you like honey? How does it
taste? What is its colour?
Where does honey come from?
Honey is made by bees who collect the nectar from flowers and
bring it back to the hive. The honey is food for bees in the hive.
It is also useful in the winter or at times when there are fewer
flowers.
Have you seen a hive (or honeycomb)?
Students might have seen beehives attached to trees or old buildings,
or honeycombs - hives full of honey - for sale in the bazaar.
Have you seen the patterns on a honeycomb?
Draw the hexagonal patterns on the board.
You may tell a story of a beehive - similar to the ant-hill, the beehive is like a palace. There is
a queen bee, drones or princes, worker bees and young bees ...
How is honey eaten? What is honey eaten along with?
Honey may be part of some sweets, it may be had with milk, with some herbal medicines, with
roti, in lemon juice ...

Activity 10.7: Write the names of food items - different foodgrains, vegetables, fruits and
animal products, on chits of paper. Fold the pieces and keep them in a bowl. Pick up one
chit from the bowl and say whether this food comes from a plant or an animal.

Activity 10.8: Write the names of different domestic or food animals on the chits of paper.
The teacher may call out "milk", "eggs", "meat", "four legs", "two legs", "wings" ... All those
students having the appropriate animals raise their hands and tell the names of the animal.
