time 5
17. Day and night
18. Calendar
19. Festivals

17. day and night

This topic deals with events happening over one day:
a scale of time which is immediately meaningful in our
"everyday" life. Other references to time over hours
and days have come up in the topics of School and
Market. The next topic will deal with events happening
over months and years, while much shorter time scales
of seconds will be introduced later, in Small Science Class 3.
Wake up, clean up
Act out the things you do every morning on waking up.
Perhaps someone wakes you up - you open your eyes, sit up,
stretch, get out of bed, look out of the window (is it bright
outside or still dark), wash your face ...

Activity 17.1: Bring to class at least one thing that you use to
clean yourself in the mornings. Show or act out with the help
of these things how you clean yourself.
Students may bring tooth powder, a mug, soap, towel, comb,
nail-cutter ... Some of these things may also be kept in the
classroom for students who might have come to school without
washing or combing their hair. In case your students need to be taught clean habits, this
activity should be done on the first day of school.
Do you wash your hands and feet after playing outdoors? Do you wash your hands before
eating anything?
Time of the day
How can you tell when it is morning, evening or night?
What do you do at these different times?

Activity 17.2: Have you seen a clock? Pretend you are a clock!
What sounds does a clock make? What parts of it move?
Do the two (or three) hands move equally fast? Try to turn your
arms as slowly as the hands of a clock. Now turn them faster!
Bring a working clock to class. With the help of the students you might make a model
cardboard clock with moveable arms, or find a ready-made toy clock or an old broken clock.
Let students play with the clock and read the numbers on its face.
At what time do you usually wake up? At what time do you leave home for school? At what
time does school begin? At what time do you reach home after school? What do you do at
home after school? Do you go out to play? What games do you play? Act out all these things.

When do you eat your breakfast, lunch, dinner? At what time do you go to sleep at night?
Students may have only a rough idea about the times of the day. It is enough for them to be
able to recall a long sequence of actions through the day, and to know some of the important
timings.
What all do you do when you have half-day school? What do you do on school holidays?

Activity 17.3: Divide a drawing sheet into four parts. Above each part write: "morning",
"afternoon", "evening" or "night". In each of these parts, draw something that you see or do
at that time of the day.
Day and night
Have you seen the sun rise or set? Describe where you have seen it. How does the sun
look just after sunrise or just before sunset?

Activity 17.4: Watch the sky during the day. What different things do you see in the sky in
day time? Watch the sky at night. What different things do you see?
Sun, moon, stars, as also clouds, birds, aeroplanes, kites...
Which of these things do you see every day (or night),
which ones do you see only on some days or at some times?
What do we see in the sky only in the daytime? What can
we see in the sky only during night time? Are there things
that we might see in the sky both during the day and night?
Have you ever seen the moon during the day?
The next activity should be preceded by Activity 21.21
on page 104.

Activity 17.5: Watch your shadow all through the day. Notice when it is long or short.
Can you see a shadow when the sun is covered by clouds? Can you see a shadow at night?
When is your shadow clear and sharp? When is it not so sharp?
Do you see or hear some animals (including insects and birds) only in the daytime or only
at night?

Activity 17.6: Fold a drawing sheet into two parts. Write above the two parts: "Day" and
"Night". Draw a scene of a day in the first part and a scene of night time in the second part.
What things will you draw to show that it is day or night?
Yesterday, today, tomorrow
Use these three terms in everyday conversation so that students become familiar with them.
80

18. calendar

The time-scale of one year, though seemingly
large, is nonetheless meaningful in a child's
world. The months of the calendar fit in with
the natural cycles of the stars, sun and moon,
the cycle of seasons, of agricultural activities
and festivals. More immediately for students, the calendar connects up with their school
year, vacations and birthdays. It helps us think about past and future happenings and to
perceive regularity in various natural, social and academic events over the year. In addition,
the calendar is a powerful yet easily available tool which can support the development of
literacy and numeracy.
Here we are talking about the "Gregorian calendar" which is used throughout the world. In
India this calendar is used for civic and administrative purposes while local calendars based
partly on phases of the moon might be used for agricultural activities and festivals.
Sometimes you will find these two types of calendars combined into one.
For this topic you will need a large calendar for the current year. Preferably it should have
one month per page, done in clear, well-spaced lettering. If necessary you could make such a
calendar. Ask students to look for any calendars in their own homes and possibly bring them
to class. For some of the activities an old calendar will do too.
If students already have an idea of today's date and day of the week, you may begin by
asking them that. The terms "yesterday", "today" and "tomorrow" should be known to all.
Some familiarity with the names of the seven days of the week and the twelve months of the
year will be good preparation for the topic of calendar.
Year
What is the year shown on your calendar?
The number showing the year is written on every page
of the calendar. Find out where it is written.
Write the current year on the blackboard. This is probably
larger than any number that the students have seen before.
In fact it is likely that students do not know of the existence
of four-digit numbers; certainly at this stage they would lack the concept of such large
numbers. Yet, through some associations this number denoting the year will still make sense
to them. For example, they may have seen the year written prominently in a poster or
advertisement; they may know other such numbers, say the year of their birth, or they may
have heard of the "New Year", when this number increases by one digit. Though students
may not yet understand it as a number, they should be able to write the digits of the year and
say the number aloud.
81

Month

Count how many pages there are in your calendar.
Many calendars have twelve pages, perhaps printed back-to-back on six sheets. After
identifying the pages for each month, you may teach students to recite the names of the
twelve months. In this way, with increasing familiarity, students should be able to guess-read
the names from the calendar page - for example, by knowing the position in the page where
the name of the month is written, and noticing the first letter of that word. Such "reading"
by pattern-recognition is possible much before students learn to spell such long words.
What year and month are we in now?
Open to that page in the calendar.
How many of you have your birthday in this month?
What month came before this one? What month will come next? Find out from the
calendar.
What month comes after September? What is the month before July? etc.
Students should frame more such questions and ask them to each other.

Date, day and week

Draw the calendar of the month on the blackboard (see Activity 18.5). Follow the numbers
using a pointer.
What is today's date? What does each of these numbers in the date tell us?
Explain which part of the date indicates the day, month and year.
Show today's date in this calendar. What day of the week is it today?

Activity 18.1: Is there anything special about today? Is it a festival day? Is it someone's
birthday? Is it raining hard? Is your favourite tree flowering? Is any special event due to
happen today? Draw a small picture near the date on the calendar to show this.
Some suggestions on festivals are given in the next topic. You may remind students about
upcoming events so that they are prepared to observe more. Suggestions on observing plants
are given in Activity 5.19, page 34-35. Personal events could be recorded on their own
calendar (Activity 18.5).
Read out all the numbers for the dates in this month. How many days are there in this month?
Some printed calendars may need to be read horizontally and some vertically.
82
Read out every alternate date number. Now read out every third number. Notice how the
numbers are arranged in the calendar. How many numbers are there in one line (row or
column)?

Activity 18.2: Count the number of school days in this month.
This activity should be started on the first day of the month. On every school day put one
pebble or a seed in a box. When ten pebbles accumulate, replace them with a larger stone or
a seed. Another way could be to make tally marks above the calendar for the month.
Students may count their own days of attendance using these same methods.
At the end of the month compare the number of school days with the total number of days in
this month. How many holidays did you have this month?
In what colour are the dates printed?
Usually in two colours, red for holidays.
Which dates are written in red? Why are they coloured differently? What are the holidays
shown in this month?
Sundays and other holidays, festivals and days of national importance.
Name the days of the week. Repeat the names of the days of the week while counting them
on your fingers. How many days are there in a week? How many days are there in two
weeks?
The names of the days may be written in short form in the calendar, using only the first three
letters ("Mon", "Tue" etc.).
Show yesterday's day and date in the calendar. Now show tomorrow's day and date. How
many more days till Sunday?
What day comes after Wednesday? What is the day before Saturday? etc..
What day of the week is the 5th of (this month)? What is the date on the second Friday of this
month? What was the date on last Thursday? etc.
Students should frame more such questions and ask them to each other.
How many Sundays are in this month? How many Mondays? etc..
Count the number of weeks in this month.
Four weeks and a few more days, except in February.
What is the day on the 1st of this month? On the 2nd?
If the first day of that month is a Tuesday, then ask for the date on the next Tuesday, and so
on. Through such exercises students would become familiar with patterns of numbers like 1,
8, 15, 22, 29 which are the result of successive additions of the number 7.
83
What is the last date of this month? What is the day? What day, date and month will come
after that?
If December, what is the next year?

Activity 18.3: Do all months have the same number of days?
Students might be taught the trick to find out how many days in a month by counting the
months on their knuckles. The rhyme "30 days hath September ... " may also be taught.
Birthdays
When is your birthday? Whose birthday comes in this month? Find your birthday on the
calendar.

Activity 18.4: Draw a tower made of squares, one square for each birthday of a classmate
in that month. Make each square a different colour.
Blackboard work: Picture graph of birthdays for each month.
Similar graphs could be made by recording some other interesting or entertaining events
through the months. For example, every day you may ask how many teeth fall out of the
students in your class. Every month add up the number of teeth which fell out. At the end
of the year students may make a graph for this data.
Ask your parents, on what day of the week were you born? Then check in the calendar, on
what day of the week does your birthday fall this year?
How many months do you have to wait till your next birthday?
84

Your own calendar

Activity 18.5: Make your own Calendar.
Give to students an activity sheet for one month. Make a similar Table on the blackboard and
use it for giving directions and spellings wherever needed. Do this activity three or four times
during the year. Initially you may need to go step-by-step with the class, filling up the entire
calendar on the blackboard as you go along. After some practice students will learn to do it
on their own.
The following elaborate set of instructions for filling the calendar activity sheet might be
needed in the first few months.
1. Which is the year going on now? Write it in the left blank space.
Point to the space in the sample sheet or on the blackboard.
2. Write the name of the month in the next blank space.
3. In the first row of the Table, write the names of the days of the week.
4. What will you write in the rest of the rows? Where will you write "1" for the first day of
this month?
5. Put a cross in each of the empty blocks which come before the "1". Which was the day
on 2, 3 ... (continue till the end of the week)? Now where will you write the next date?
6. Where will you stop? How many days are there in this month? What comes after the last
day of the month?
7. What are the holidays in this month? Besides Sundays, do you have a holiday on any
other day? For what reason?
85
Ask the students to keep their finger on that date while you check. If they cannot recall the
dates then show them a ready calendar.
8. How will you show the school holidays in your calendar? You could draw a circle or
square around these dates. You may also draw an icon or symbol for that special day.
Explain by drawing some common icons, for example the one for "danger" or "no smoking".
Students may be familiar with such icons and may recall others too. Thus they will
understand how a symbol is used to express an idea. Encourage them to come up with
their own icons.
9. Note any other interesting thing that happened or that you did on this day. You may mark
on your calendar events like birthdays - yours or your friends' or family members', the
school annual day or sports day, picnics, fairs, a visit from an aunt, a special feast at
home, the days that you were unwell, and so on.
10. In your calendar draw and show the changes in your favourite plants in different seasons
during the year. (See Activity 5.19 on page 34.)
Help students choose a tree, preferably a deciduous one or one which blooms profusely.
Ask them to notice it regularly for any changes. Do they see insects or birds near or on it?
They may make a simple drawing of that tree every month or whenever they see any change.
Students’ Drawings
86
With our diversity of religions, languages and ways of life, we
Indians celebrate a large number of festivals all through the year.
City dwellers tend to forget this, but most of our festivals derive
from our traditional rural lifestyles, and some even go back into
our tribal origins. Everyday aspects of village life are determined
by the length of day, changes of seasons and the moon's phases. Such events and their
connections with economic activities and family life are highlighted by our festivals, offering
us a rich context for observational learning of the natural and the social world.
There are many examples of festivals which coincide with the turning points of seasons.
Diwali is when the winter sets in. Makar Sankranti and Lohri mark the wane of the cold
season in the North while Pongal and Onam signal the end of the winter monsoon in the
South. Basant Panchami in North India welcomes the warmth of spring and the blooming
mustard fields, soon after which Holi and Baisakhi mark the onset of summer bringing more
new flowers. Bihu is celebrated in Assam three times in the year - as Meha or Magh Bihu,
Bohag or Rongali Bihu and Kati Bihu - connected with the winter, spring and autumn seasons.
Ganesh Chaturthi in Western India and Dussehra mark the end of the monsoon while at the
same time in the East, Durga Pooja rejoices the end of floods and epidemics.
For the agrarian economy, seasonal changes bring major events like sowing, flowering of the
crop and harvesting. The seasonal foods, decorations and characteristic festivities are closely
bound with these agricultural events - Makar Sankranti is given later as an example.
Traditional occupations like fishing and trading too have their own festivals and ways of
celebrating them. Tribal festivals tend to be unique and specific to a tribe, though often they
may be closely related with festivals more commonly known by other names.
Feasts of prophets and saints are important occasions for celebration and remembrance.
Relationships like sister-brother, teacher-student, wife-husband and niece-uncle, come to the
fore through specific rituals. All major religious festivals are celebrated in many regional
variations. The appropriate classroom activities would therefore vary according to region.
Festivals, besides being social, economic and religious events, are the parts of our lives which
connect up with astronomical happenings: the phases of the moon, the summer and winter
solstices and the entry of the sun into specific constellations. Most of our festivals are
determined by lunar and luni-solar calendars. Students can begin to
get an idea of these cosmic regularities by observing the shape of the
moon on appropriate festival days. For example, notice the thin
crescent moon of Ramzan Id and Bhai dooj; the near-full shape of
Dussehra, Mohurrum and Bakri-Id, and the full moon of a number of
different festivals like Holi, Mahavir Jayanti, Buddha Poornima and
Guru Parab (see Small Science Class 4 Teacher's Book pages 74-75).
Hanukkah, the Jewish festival of light, spans eight days around the new
moon closest to the winter solstice.

19. festivals

Integrating in all this diversity are festivals marking important National events -
Independence Day and Republic Day. These are wonderful opportunities to help students
gradually internalise the idea that we are all part of one large country, India.
General questions on festivals
Before the festival: What is this day called? How do you greet each other on this day?

Activity 19.1: Story time!
A teacher or a student might narrate a story related with a festival.

Activity 19.2: Act out some scenes from the story.

Activity 19.3: Find poems and songs related with the festival.

Activity 19.4: Make a greeting card for an approaching festival. You might draw or paste
in this card pictures of things used to celebrate the festival.
Where possible, guide students to make observations of nature, linking these to ways of
celebrating the festival. Some examples are given in the description of the festivals below.
Look for more examples in your local environment.

Activity 19.5: Make an exhibit related to the festival.
You may depict some characters, scenes or celebrations associated with the festival. The
classroom or a corner could be decorated as appropriate for that festival.
Activity 19.6: Celebrate this festival in your school or class.
The celebration may be arranged earlier or later, in case the festival day is a school holiday.
Students may wear the appropriate kind of dresses and share a special food item related with
the festival.
After the festival: How did you celebrate this festival? Did you do anything special on this
day? Did you and others wear new clothes?
Did you have anything special to eat? Was any special dish made at home? Did you see
how it was made? Did you help in making it?
Did you go out with your family? Where? Did friends and relatives visit you?
What do you like (or dislike) about this festival?

Activity 19.7: Make a drawing to show how you celebrated the festival.

Lohri/ Makar Sankranti/ Pongal/ Magh Bihu
Makar Sankranti is an ancient festival. Some tribes of India celebrate this
day as their new year. It is the day when the sun moves into the Makar
rashi or approximately the Capricornis constellation. Makar sankranti
has been given special significance because some 1400 years ago, the sun
used to be in this same position during the winter solstice (i.e. December 22,
the shortest day of the year in the earth's northern hemisphere). At present,
the Sun enters Makar rashi in the third week of January, instead of on December 22.
Makar Sankranti coincides with the rabbi harvest which happens towards the end of winter.
It is the first major festival in January and one of the few festivals which closely follow the
Gregorian calendar, falling on January 13, 14 or 15 every year.
In Punjab the day prior to Makar Sankranti is celebrated as Lohri by distributing sugarcane
juice, new jaggery and sweets made from sesame seeds (til), followed by bonfire, bhangra and
feasting in the evening. Sesame and jaggery are energy-rich foods appropriate for winter;
besides, this is the harvest season for sesame and sugarcane. The Sindhis celebrate it as
Uttarayan or Dutran - after bathing in water mixed with sesame, eatables including fresh
fruits, vegetables and til laddus are given in charity. In Uttar Pradesh, this period is
celebrated as Kicheri and in Madhya Pradesh as Sukarat. In Bihar special sweets are made
from tender turmeric. In Maharashtra "tilgul" made of sesame seeds (til) and jaggery (gul) is
exchanged saying "Tilgul ghya, gode gode bola" (accept this tilgul and speak sweet words).
The day before Sankranti is celebrated as Bhogi when bhakri (roti) of bajra is eaten with mixed
winter vegetables and tender roasted jowar (another rabbi millet) is had with seasonal fruits.
The cool weather, clear skies and mild breeze are ideal for flying kites. In Gujarat there are
community kite-flying competitions and the sky is filled with kites of different shapes, colours
and sizes.
In Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, Sankranti is
celebrated as Pongal, the harvest festival for paddy, sugarcane and
turmeric. The Makar Sankranti festival at Sabarimala temple in Kerala
is celebrated together by people of all communities. Celebrations in
Tamil Nadu last for three days. On the first day, Bhogi, the house is
cleaned and all old, unwanted things are burnt in the night while boys
beat little drums called Bhogi Kottu. This is the day for worship of the
Rain God. The next day, Pongal, is when the Sun God is worshipped
with an offering of Sarkkarai Pongal, that is, rice boiled with milk and jaggery. Beautiful
Kolam designs decorate the entrances to the houses. On the third day, Maattu Pongal or
Kaanum Pongal, cattle are bathed, dressed with flowers, bells and colours, and honored for
their hard work in the fields. Women pray for the health of their brothers.

Activity 19.8: Share a snack of pongal or tilgul or revdi or ... in class.

Activity 19.9: A long term activity - observe where and when the sun rises and sets.

About once every month observe when and where the sun rises (or sets) with respect to
some landmark, say a tree or a house. Show this position in a picture. Note if there is any
change in the time or position.
Vasant Panchami
Vasant or Basant Panchami falls on the
fifth day of the lunar month of Magh. It is
a spring festival celebrating the new leaves
and flowers of spring. Mustard fields bloom
with yellow flowers. Trees like Mango and Cassia also begin to bloom. The festival is
celebrated in Northern India and in Pakistan by Hindus and Muslims alike by wearing yellow
clothes, eating yellow foods and participating in community activities like processions to
dargahs, musical mehfils and kite-flying. In Bengal, Saraswati pooja is the main feature of the
festivities.
In Southern India where winters are not too cold, spring is a less prominent season. Yet the
warmth in the air and the flowering of trees is easily noticed. Spring is also the mating
season for many birds. The sounds of bulbuls and magpie robins and the loud call of the koel
are heard.

Activity 19.10: Learn to make kites and fly them.

Activity 19.11: Make the sound of the koel or another bird that you have heard.

Activity 19.12: Notice the shape of the moon a few days before and on the day of Basant
Panchami.
Which other festivals have you heard of which are celebrated on a Panchami?
Panchami is the fifth day after the new moon. Other such festivals are, Rang Panchami, Naag
Panchami and Rishi Panchami.

Activity 19.13: Watch the dark part of the moon.
Do you notice anything beyond the lighted crescent of the moon? Is the crescent moon
actually still as round as ever? Make a guess.
Does the moon appear to be round like a plate or like a ball?
Holi
Holi falls on the full-moon day of the lunar month of Falgun. In North India, the winter
(rabbi) crops of wheat, barley, gram, peas and turmeric are ready for harvest before Holi.
Peepal and banyan trees don a fresh look with their new pink leaves. Other trees like the
copper-pod, erythrina (Indian coral tree), palash or flame of the forest, silk cotton tree,
ashoka, mango and neem begin to bloom around this time. Holi is the festival of colours!
90

Activity 19.14: Watch for a tree which has suddenly got new leaves or bloomed with flowers.
The fallen leaves and twigs are burnt in a bonfire on the night before Holi.
Blackboard work: Name some colours. Now name one flower of each of these colours.

Activity 19.15: Chip-chap
Make a "chip-chap" with names of four colours written on the top and names of flowers of
those colours written inside. Play a guessing game with this.
Use natural vegetable colours to play Holi! Do not use synthetic and colour-fast paints which
are often harmful to the skin and eyes. Use only clean water. Do not throw water-balloons,
they may hurt someone.
Traditionally gulal is made from the flowers of palash, also called dhak or tesu (Butea frondosa
or Butea monosperma). Gulmohar is also used for red, shoeflower for purple while for yellow
the flowers of Indian laburnum or amaltas (Cassia fistula), marigold or genda (Tagetes erecta),
yellow chrysanthemum and black babul (Acacia arabica) are used. The flowers are dried in
the sun, powdered and used directly or mixed in cereal or gram flour for bulk.
Be careful, do not use un-tried vegetable matter for Holi! Use only flowers or leaves which
are edible or known, through long usage, to be safe. You might use beetroot for dark pink, a
paste of spinach or tender leaves of the wheat plant for green, or haldi for yellow. For more
ideas look at http://www.cleanindia.org/btonature/holi.htm.

Activity 19.16: Get different kinds of pichkaris to class. Fill them with water. Play with
them as appropriate.

Activity 19.17: Share some malpua, thandai, puranpoli, gujjia, papri or whichever are the
local snacks of the day.

Activity 19.18: Holi on paper!
Some flowers can be used to paint by rubbing their petals on to paper. Paint a Holi scene
using flowers.
See Activity 5.12 on page 32.
Make a colourful face mask with flower-painting!

Activity 19.19: Find out and sing some Holi songs.

Activity 19.20: Watch for the moon on Holi night and then early next morning. Was the
moon up in the sky all night?
Vishu, Navroze, Naba Barsha, etc.
The new year of many Hindu and some Buddhist calendars is celebrated on a new moon day
around March or April, in the season of spring, close to the vernal equinox (first day of the
lunar month of Chaitra). In Maharashtra and Goa this day is called Gudhi Padwa, in Andhra
and Karnataka it is Yugadi or Ugadi, in Kashmir Navreh, while for the Sindhis it is Chetichand.
Poila Baishakh or Naba Barsha in Bengal is the first day of the month of Baisakh. Vishu in
Kerala and in Tamilnadu occurs on April 13, 14 or 15 as does Rongali Bihu or Bohag Bihu in
Assam and Baisakhi in Punjab. It was on Baisakhi day in 1699 near Anandpur Sahib that
Guru Gobind Singh founded the Khalsa Panth.
The Parsi new year, Navroze, is celebrated every year on the vernal
equinox that is, March 21, when the time between sunrise and sunset is
exactly 12 hours. The Jains celebrate new year on Diwali day, a tradition
since adopted by the business communities in North and Western India.
The Muslim new year, a more solemn occasion, is the first day of the
month of Mohurrum which may occur during different times of the solar year.

Activity 19.21: Make a gudhi and hang it up in the class.
A gudhi in Maharashtra and Goa is a pole on top of which an upturned brass pot is placed
and adorned with colourful silk cloth, marigold flowers and mango or neem leaves. You
could find appropriate activities carried out on a local new year's day.

Ramzan Id
Ramzan is the ninth month of Muslim calendar and the most sacred month
for Muslims of all sects. It is believed that the Quran was received during this month. In this
month Muslims fast from sunrise to sunset, not even drinking water. The meal before sunrise
is called the Sehri and after the sunset the fast is broken with Iftari. Prayer or Namaaz is
offered five times in a day.
At the end of the month the Ramzan Id (or Ramadan, also called Id-ul-Fitr) is celebrated with
special prayers, feasts, sweets and gift-giving. The aroma of Shirkurma (a sweet pudding or
kheer) and Biryani is all over. People wear dazzling new clothes, wishing each other "Id
Mubarak!" Children are happy with all the festivities, and the Idee (special pocket money)
that they get.
Activity 19.22: Find out the ingredients of one special dish that is made during Ramzan Id.

Activity 19.23: Look at the moon on the eve of the Id. Draw and colour the (crescent)
moon and the sky .

Activity 19.24: "Chand ka kurta" - a poem or story about the moon asking his mother to
make him a kurta (shirt), but she complains that he changes size and shape every day!
Diwali
Diwali is celebrated on a new moon day after the autumn
equinox. It is the last day of the lunar month of Kartik.

Activity 19.25: Draw a kolam or rangoli design on paper.
Give a worksheet with an array of dots, or nested square shapes or two concentric circles,
inside which the students could make their own designs. They may also make their own
small grid of 4 X 4 dots for drawing rangoli. A square-lined page would be helpful.

Activity 26. Make a kolam or rangoli design on the floor.
Groups of students could make a
small rangoli design and fill it with
colours or flowers. If floor space is
not available, make the designs on
pieces of cardboard or on old
notebook covers.
Student’s Drawings
Find out, what is kolam paste or powder made from? What is rangoli made from?

Activity 19.27: With your teacher's help prepare and light an earthen lamp.
Find out what the lamp is made from, how the wick is prepared and what fuels are used in
the lamp.

Activity 19.28: Make a paper lantern.

Activity 19.29: Look for the moon on Diwali day. Observe its shape on Bhai-dooj day.
For how many days did you have holidays for Diwali? Show it on your calendar.
There are many problems with the often excessive and inappropriate use of fire-crackers
during Diwali. Firstly, students should feel concerned about the exploitation of children like
themselves who are forced to spend long hours manufacturing fire-crackers. Point out also
the harmful effect of smoke and sound, particularly on old and sick persons and babies.
Demonstrate the safe and limited use of fire-crackers, cautioning students against prevalent
dangerous practices.

Christmas

Christmas is celebrated every year on 25th of December as the day that Jesus
Christ was born. On the eve of Christmas special prayers are offered at the
midnight mass and Christmas carols are sung. Houses and churches are
decorated. On Christmas day, people dressed in their best meet friends and
relatives and have delicious food cooked in the style of that region. The fir tree
(often a model of it, since fir does not grow in most parts of India) or an
appropriate tree of the region is decorated and toy stockings are hung on it by
children for Santa Claus to put gifts in them.

Activity 19.30: A teacher or older student comes dressed as Santa Claus.

Activity 19.31: Decorate a Christmas tree.

Activity 19.32: Loop and link colourful paper strips to make
a long chain for decoration.
Activity 19.33: Make a Santa Claus mask.
National festivals
Independence Day
After a long and difficult struggle, on August 15, 1947, India became free from 200 years of
British rule. The best way to tell students about our independence struggle is through stories.
There are a number of good books to help you, for example, Sheila Dhar's "Our India". Other
books are listed on page 115 - 116.
94
Republic Day
On January 26, 1950 the constitution of India came into force,
that is, our leaders decided on the rules for how to run the
newly-independent country.
Every year on Independence Day and Republic Day the national flag is hoisted at all
important public places, including in our school. On Independence day the Prime-
Minister (name) hoists the Indian flag on the Red Fort in Delhi. The Republic Day
celebrations are held at Rajpath in New Delhi where the President (name) hoists the
flag. Then there is the Republic Day parade ...
You might try to familiarise students with the difficult ideas of "country",
"independence", "freedom", "flag" etc. with the help of pictures and stories about
Mahatma Gandhi, Babasaheb Ambedkar, Sardar Patel, Maulana Azad, and so on.
The books listed on page 115 will help.
What happened in our school on Republic Day? Who hoisted the flag? How?
Hoisting and saluting the flag; colours of the flag, the tri-colour or tiranga of saffron,
green and white with the Ashoka Chakra having 24 spokes in dark blue. The flag is made of
handspun and handwoven khadi cloth, sometimes also of handmade silk or wool.

Activity 19.34: Draw and colour our national flag.
The ratio of length to width is 3:2. You may draw it as 9 cm x 6 cm with the help of a ruler.

Activity 19.35: Learn to sing our National Anthem.
The lyrics and music of our National Anthem were composed by Rabindranath Tagore.
Teach the correct tune and tempo - with singing or playing time approximately 52 seconds.

Activity 19.36: Learn some songs about our country.
Teach some simple patriotic songs.

Activity 19.37: Learn to recognise the National emblem.
Look for the National emblem of India on coins, bank notes, revenue
stamps and government buildings and documents. The emblem is
adapted from the top portion of the Ashoka pillar at Sarnath in Uttar
Pradesh. The pillar, carved out of sandstone, stands at the place where
2500 years ago Gautam Buddha preached his first sermon. The pillar
has four lion-heads facing four directions, below whom are four smaller
animals, a lion, an elephant, a horse and a bull, alternating with four
Ashoka Chakras. The emblem shows three of the lions (the fourth is
hidden from view). Of the smaller animals the horse and the bull are
visible in the emblem, with an Ashoka Chakra between them. Below
the emblem is the motto "Satyameva Jayate", meaning, in Sanskrit,
"Truth Alone Triumphs".
