people and Places 4
11. Our school
12. Market
13. Letters, postman, post-office
14. Buses and bus stops
15. Trains and train stations
16. People at work

11. our school

What is a school?
Optional question - students may give either learnt or original responses.
What is the name of our school?
Which other names of schools do you know? Have you seen any of these other schools or
only heard of them?
Schools may be in a surrounding area or somewhere else. This will give an idea of the range
of their experiences of schools. They may know of different types of schools like girls’, boys’,
co-educational, boarding schools and ashram shalas.
Do your sisters/ brothers attend the same school as you or a different one?
Do you know any children around you who do not go to school? Why not? Do you think
they should, or would like to, go to school?

Activity 11.1: Draw a picture of your school. Show yourself, your school friends and others
in the picture. Write down the name of the school.
Activity 11.2: Draw the way from your home to school. Show what you see along the
way, like buildings and shops and
also write their names. You may
also draw trees or any other things
that you see on the way.
Counting time
Is your school close to, or far away from
your house? How much time does it
take you to reach there?
Do you walk or use some vehicle like, a
cycle, scooter or bus, to come to school?
Do you come on your own or with someone?
How do you know when the school has
begun and when it has ended? Imitate the sound of your school bell.
Do you like school? Are you happy to come to school? Why? Are you happy when school
ends and it is time to go home? Why?
At what time of the day does your school begin? Are you ever late for school? What
happens then?
Student’s
Drawing
Student’s Drawing
61
At what time does the school end? So how many hours do you spend in school? Is that a lot
of time?
Students might try counting the hours forward on their fingers from the time of start of the
school day. Explain that after 12:00 noon you get to 1:00 in the afternoon. If necessary
ignore half-hours and round off to the nearest hour. Students' idea of "time of day" may be
less or more developed depending on the educational background at their home.
Do you have a "half day" at school sometimes, when? At what time does the school end on
that day? This is how much earlier than usual?
Do you have "periods" in school? How many periods do you have on a full day? On a
"half day"?
The class time-table can be used for this discussion.
How do you know when a period or the recess is ended? Is this sound or ring different from
the starting or ending bell?
On which days do you have holidays? (Sundays, festivals, etc.)
Count how many days are there in a week. On how many of these days do you come to
school?
Describe the things that you do from the beginning to the end of a school day.
During school after how many periods do you have recess? Why do you have recess? What
do you do then?
Learning in school
Which class are you in? What is the name of your class teacher?
What are the different things (s)he does with you? Are there also
other teachers who teach you?
Do you celebrate Teacher’s day in your school? On which date
is it celebrated? How?
Do you learn different subjects in school? Count how many subjects you learn.
Depending on the nature of the school, students may have different ideas about "subjects"
that they learn.
Which subject or class do you like the most? Why? How many of you like "________"
(a particular subject)? Count the number of students who have raised their hands in
response. Is there any class that you do not like? Why?
What do you learn in school? Each of you name one thing that you have learnt in school, that
you did not know before!
62
People and parts of the school
Who are all the people in your school? What do each of them do?
Introduce words like student, teacher, principal, head-teacher, clerk, peon, helper, gardener
and also classmate, schoolmate ...

Activity 11.3: Come to the front of the class and act like a teacher. Act like your Principal,
or any other person in your school.
What are the different places or rooms in your school?
Classrooms, office, staff room, library, display areas, playground, toilet, etc. A "treasure hunt"
might be an interesting way to familiarise students with the different parts of the school.
Take Care
If there is a kitchen in the school, it should be away from the classrooms. No
flammable materials should be kept in or near the classrooms.
Which part of your school (premises) do you like the best? Why?

Activity 11.4: Count and find out - How many classes and how many classrooms are there
in your school? Does every class have a room? Are the classrooms large enough to hold all
the students in that class?

Activity 11.5: Pretend that you have done something wrong, for example, you may have
come to school late, or not done your homework. One of you be the student, another be the
teacher and act out this scene. Then pretend that you have done something good, like doing
your homework well (think of some other nice things)! Act out this scene too.

Activity 11.6: Count the
number of students in your
class. Each one of you write
your name with a crayon in
large letters on a sheet of paper
or thin paper plate. Decorate
the other side of the paper with a drawing or painting.
You may help students with the writing. The papers or
plates of all the students can be pasted along a string which
can be tied overhead in the class.
New words
period, subject,
attendance,
classmate, schoolmate,
office, staff.
Students’ Drawings
63
12. MARKET
Have you been to a market?
Have you ever been to a market? What do you do in a market? How often
do you go to the market?
Use words like, regularly, often (many times), sometimes, rarely (few times) ...
When was the last time you went to a market?
Which different markets have you seen?
These are initial probes to gauge the range of students' experiences. Have they
been to only one neighbourhood market or to several? Do they know about
specialised markets? About markets that may be set up for a single day of the week - as a
village market or on a few or on all days with an exceptional holiday?
What all have you seen in the market? What were the different people doing? Close your eyes
and recall everything that you saw, heard or smelt.
Recall shops, vendors squatting or standing with baskets or hand- carts (thela-walas), calling out
their wares and prices, people buying things, arguing over prices; smells, as those of
vegetables, fruits, hay, leather ...
Imitate the calls of some roadside vendors. Do you like going to the market? Why or why not?
Do you go to the market alone or along with someone? With whom? Do you get some
instructions (do older people tell you what you should do or not do) in the market?
Are markets crowded? Do you see more crowd sometimes, at which times of the day or
week or year?
Morning or evening, holidays, festivals - give examples
Have you seen a market in any other place or in another part of your town or city? How was it
different from the one in your area?
Have you seen some special markets, like fruit, flower, fish, cloth, metal, cattle markets?
Find out about one such special market.
So now, we have talked so much about markets, can you tell me in one or two sentences, what
is a market?
Students may need some help in construction of sentences like, "A market is a place where ..."
Greengrocer (A person selling vegetables)

Activity 12.1: Visit the market with your parents.
Alternatively, the class could be taken for a visit to the market. When students are taken for
a visit it would be better to concentrate on only a few things, like vegetables and fruits. Some
guidelines for observation should also be given, for example, notice different kinds of
64
vegetables and fruits; their names; what are they kept in? (in baskets or boxes made of cane,
wood, cardboard or plastic of different colours, with or without straw (why straw?); any
special arrangements; watch how customers ask for and select vegetables or fruit - by sight,
touch, smell; do customers bring bags, does the vendor provide bags; how the vendor weighs
or measures out the vegetables or fruits; exchange of money; arguing over price (bargaining) ...
Blackboard work: Which are the vegetables that you saw at the greengrocer's?
The names of vegetables are written on the blackboard in some natural categories.

Activity 12.2: Draw some vegetables or fruit that you saw in the market.

Activity 12.3: Fold a sheet of paper into 6 or 8 parts. Write
the numerals 1, 2, 3 ... in one corner of each box. In each
box, draw as many vegetables as the number, say 1 pumpkin,
2 bunches of spinach, 3 lady’s fingers (bhindis) ...
Describe how the vegetables were arranged at the greengrocer's.
In small shares or larger piles, spread on a sheet, in baskets, on a cart, arranged in steps ...
Does any vegetable seller come to your house? How does he or she bring vegetables?
Customers got vegetables; what did they give to the greengrocer?
Money, notes, coins - some simple money-exchange activities may be done in class.
Do greengrocers sell the vegetables by number or weight or a fixed amount, i.e. a bundle or
a share? Which vegetables are sold in these different ways?
These questions should be simplified using some examples of vegetables that are sold by
number, weight or share.
How does the greengrocer weigh the vegetables? What does (s)he use?
How are the vegetables carried home? Does your mother or father bring a cloth bag from
home? Are vegetables sold in paper or plastic bags? What is done with these bags later?
Do you know that we should avoid unnecessary use of plastics? Find out why we should use
as few plastic bags as possible and what kind of bags we should use instead.
65
Plastic remains as it is, it does not decompose easily. Waste plastic bags create more garbage,
clog drains and poison the soil. This poison may enter our water or food. When animals like
cows and goats eat plastic they slowly get sick and die.
Shops
What different types of shops have you seen?
Do all shops sell the same things?
How do you find out what things are sold in
some shop?
From signboards, from things displayed outside
and inside, or in show-windows ...
Who are the people you see in the shop?
shopkeepers, helpers, salespersons, customers
What things do you see in the shop? What things does the shopkeeper use? What are
these used for?
Weighing balance, measuring tape, rate-board, notebook, bill or receipt book, pen, calculator ...
Does the shopkeeper sit in a particular place in the shop?
Where does (s)he keep the money that is given by customers?
Travelling (door-to-door) salespersons: Does anyone come to
your house to sell some things? What things? Describe ... etc.

Activity 12.4: Find the names of 1-2 shops near your house
and what they sell.

Activity 12.5: Collect old shop-bills from shops. Try to read
what is written on them.
Depending on the literacy level in the class, discuss what
things were written on the bill: the name or logo of the shop, address, what all is sold in it.
Select some bills where items bought are legible - what was bought, how much did it cost?

Activity 12.6: Act out a market scene. Some of you act as shopkeepers and others as
customers. The "shopkeepers" decide what is sold in the shops and a name for the shops.
The "customers" visit the shops.
Showing the items, choosing, bargaining, measuring, making bills and receipts, etc. can be
included wherever possible.
New words
shopkeeper, vendor, hawker, salesperson, customer, grocer, greengrocer, weighing balance,
measuring rod or tape, bill, receipt.
66
So far in this Unit we have seen how much children can learn by simply
observing and engaging with their surrounding social institutions like the
school and the market. Later we look at travel and means of transport as
a context for learning. Somewhere between these two lie various forms of
distance communication. Spoken and written communication modes
include letters, telegrams, telephone, fax and the internet.
The postal service being widespread in our country, letters and postmen should be familiar to
most students. A village post-office may be important in the child's world as the only place,
apart from the school, which transacts business in written, rather than spoken mode. As
always you should select topics appropriate to the experiences of your students.
Have you seen a postman (or postwoman)? Why does (s)he come to your house?
In towns and cities courier mail may also be common.

Activity 13.1: Bring to class used post-cards, envelopes and
inland or air-letters. Try to read what is written on their outside.
Look at the picture on the post-card or stamp.
Look at the cost written on it.
Even the most common stamps have interesting pictures.
Students might also bring stamps with pictures of well-known people, places and things, or
stamps from other countries with unusual pictures and their cost marked in foreign currencies.
All these are opportunities to widen the child's experiential world.
To whom was this letter sent? How did the postman know where
to bring it?
What is an "address"? Tell me your address. Find out your "pincode"
and tell it to me.
Although student may not yet be able to write or even read their own
address, if need arises they should know how to tell it to someone.
Who sent the letter? From where? The stamp-mark on the letter will
show you where it came from.
Did the letter come from very far away? Do you think your postman
might have brought it from that far away?
We will find out how letters get from one place to another.

Activity 13.2: Bring some new post-cards, inland letters and envelopes along with postal
stamps.
On which part of these will you write your message? Where will you write the name and
address of the person to whom you are sending the letter?
13. Letters, postman, post-office
67
Where will you write your own name and address?
Which of these (cards, envelopes etc.) have a stamp printed
on them? On which ones do you have to put a stamp?
Where will you affix the stamp? How will you stick it there?
What is the cost written on the post-card stamp?
As of 2004, a post-card has a 50 paise stamp while an envelope must have a minimum
5 rupee stamp. A heavier letter needs more worth of stamps.
If I buy two stamps costing 5 rupees each, how many rupees will I have to pay?
If students know that one rupee is 100 paise, they may also be able to do some simple
conversions with the cost of the stamp.
Suppose I have to affix a 5 rupee stamp on an envelope, but I have only 2 and 3 rupee
stamps, what should I do?
Where do you get inland letters, postal envelopes, stamps, etc.?
Describe step-by-step everything you will do if you have to send a letter to a friend.

Activity 13.3: Write a letter on your postcard:
Give each student a new post-card or ask
them to bring one from home. Ask them
also to bring their address written in clear
and legible form on a separate piece of paper.
In addition, they might bring the address of a
friend or relative.
Copy your parents' or friend's address in the space after the "To".
Students might learn to use the prefixes Mr., Ms., Dr., etc..
Write a message on the post-card, or draw a picture.
A simple message or drawing will do. There is no need to
follow any format.
Post the card in a post-box.
This activity may be done in combination with a visit to a
post-office, Activity 13.5.
How does the post-box look, have you seen it? Describe
its colour and shape.
In major places in cities you might find a green box for local
and a red one for outstation letters.
Student’s
Drawing
Student’s
Drawing
68
Here you should imagine and describe a simplified route taken by a typical letter to, or from,
a place known to the students. You may begin by describing how every day a postman
opens the locked door of the post-box, collects the letters, puts them in a bag and takes them
to the nearby post office. Here the workers stamp (mark) the letters with the post-mark of
that post-office and sort them according to where they have to be sent. The people who sort
the letters need not read the whole address, just the pin-code is enough - for example,
when they see the code ________ they know the letter should be sent to the ________ post
office (please give the pin code of your area). The letters are then put into bags and taken by
bicycle or van to the bus or train station ... they travel by train, airplane, bus ... and finally
reach the ________ post office where they are stamped again. The postman at the final postoffice
brings the letter to the address written on it.
Have you seen a postman or postwoman? What does he or she wear? How does (s)he carry
all the letters? Does (s)he walk to every house, go on bicycle, etc.?
You may invite local postal delivery persons to the school to demonstrate their equipment
and talk with the students about their work.

Activity 13.4: Act out a scene in which you are a postman or postwoman.

Activity 13.5: Visit a post office.
Students may do some or any of the following things depending on their level of literacy:
1. Try to read the sign-board of the post-office including the full address and pin-code.
2. Look at the boards showing timings and cost of different postal materials and services like
stationery, money-order, telegrams, etc..
3. Observe the counters for stamps and other postal materials like post-cards, money-order
and postal order. Watch what people do at the counters.
4. Find out the cost of a post-card or inland letter from the display board and buy one.
5. Try to meet and talk with the post-master.
6. Watch how letters and parcels are weighed and sorted.
7. Look at the letter boxes, their colour and shape. Find out where we put in the letter and
from where the postman takes it out. How can you tell at what time the letters will be
taken out?
After the visit students might also be told, in simple words, with examples, about registered
post, speed post, book post, money order, telegram, parcels and postal savings. If courier
services are common in the area you may explain this too.
New words
Letter, envelope, postcard, stamp, affix, address, receiver, sender, pin-code.
69
14. buses and bus stops
Children greatly enjoy riding on buses and
trains. In this Unit therefore we deal with
these two topics in some detail. Unit 6
includes general observations about various
means of transport.
Buses are a common means of transport in
cities and between towns and villages. They
provide an excellent context for learning about
places and people, besides developing skills of
literacy and numeracy. Observation of the bus itself is part of Topic 21 and therefore is not
repeated here. In preparation for the next two topics, please ask students to collect used bus
and train tickets.
City, town and village
Do you live in a city, a town or a village? What is its name?
Have any of you been to a small town? To a village? To a city? Describe these. Think of
any one difference between a city, a town and a village.
How do you travel from one part of your city, town or village to another part? How do you
travel from your city, town or village to another one?
Ask these questions in relation to the places known to students.
Bus-stand, Bus, Conductor

Activity 14.1: Make a model bus using a shoe box or any other material. Run your bus
along one or more roads drawn on the floor.
Have you travelled on a bus? Do you ride on a bus every day, many times, sometimes, or
very few times?
This is another opportunity to introduce phrases like, "often", "once in a while", "rarely", etc..
Depending on where they live, students may have experiences of local and long-distance
buses, public and private buses, or school buses. They may also have travelled in special
buses going on a tour or picnic.
Students who have seen different kinds of buses should be able to recognise them from their
distinctive colours and patterns. They may know the name of the local bus company or
public bus service and read out acronyms like BEST, DTC, MTC, PMT, ST and so on. City
buses are likely to have advertisements painted on them.
70
In big cities there are buses for travelling from one part of the city to another. Have you seen
a double-decker bus?
In India some cities like Mumbai and Chandigarh have double-decker buses.
Have you seen a bus stop? What does it look like? Have you seen a bus depot? What is it?
In a small place the bus stop may be a locally known landmark like a temple or a tea-shop, it
may be entirely unmarked, or it may have a bench with a shade or a pole. A city stop or a
major depot may have a signboard listing the route numbers, with destinations and detailed
routes of the buses stopping there.
Students may know that a particular bus visits their local stop at specific times of the day.
City students should know about route numbers of buses, at least of those serving their
own locality.
Do all the buses stopping at the stop go to the same place? How do you know where a bus
is going? Where is the name of this place written?
There are many types of numbers written on buses. The route number and destination are
written in specific places.
Have you waited for a bus at the bus stop or seen people waiting there? Do they stand in a
queue? From which door do they enter the bus and get down from it?
Take Care
While getting into a bus make a neat queue. Never try to get in after the bus has started
moving. Get down from the bus only after it stops, again in a queue.
Do the driver and conductor wear a uniform? Of what colour? Have you seen a ticket
checker at any bus stop?
How does the driver know when to stop and start the bus?
What does the conductor do? What things (tools) does he have with him?
What does he do with these things?

Activity 14.2: One of you act as a bus driver. Another will be a busconductor
and give tickets to others who will act as passengers. A few of
you may stand at a "bus-stop" in a queue and then get into the "bus" when
it comes your way.
Students may separately act out the scene inside the bus and on the bus-stop
before doing the two in co-ordination. You might encourage the "bus
conductor" to do various things like, ringing the bell to signal "stop" and
"start", asking passengers for tickets, tearing out tickets from bundles,
punching them before handing over to the passengers, accepting the money,
putting it in a bag, returning the change, and so on.
71
Does the conductor give similar tickets to everyone?
Activity 14.3: Look at the tickets you have collected. Tell how they are different from
each other. Describe their colours, try to read the numbers, letters and words written on
them. Can you tell the cost of the ticket? Can you guess on which bus it was bought?
Compare the cost written on any two tickets and try to guess which of them was used for
a longer journey.
Students may be able to read numerals in English or the local language as they are printed on
the ticket. You may write these numerals on the blackboard to help them. The tickets might
also be colour-coded according to their cost. Students with tickets bearing the same cost may
raise their hands and tell the colour of their tickets.
Some complications may arise here. The cost comparison may not work for distance if one of
the tickets is for a child and another for an adult. Also the activity may get difficult if the cost
of the tickets is written in decimal notation or is broken up into main charge plus tax. Please
do adjust the level of demand of the activity according to the experience as well as literacy
and numeracy level of your students.
Students’ Drawings
72
15. trains and train stations
Trains are perhaps a unique
example of a highly sophisticated
technology forming part of a
child's life-world. With their
enigmatic sounds, rapid
speeds and the far distances
they go, trains truly fire the
imagination of a child. And
beyond this first attraction,
trains and railway stations
offer a host of opportunities to develop literacy and numeracy in meaningful contexts.
It is possible that you find great enthusiasm for trains only from the boys in the class. In that
case please make special efforts to ensure active participation of the girls!
This is a topic in which you may find several unfamiliar words like "bogie", "signal" and even
"pantograph". These words should be used if they occur naturally in familiar contexts - see
Language Development on page 5. Take another example: "engine" is a familiar word which
is used here, yet the correct word is "locomotive", i.e. the whole contraption of which the
"engine" is one part. Though "locomotive" is a long word, children who have been on frequent
train journeys would have been exposed to it (or its short form "loco") printed on various signs,
and they would be thrilled to be able to read and recognise it.
Have you seen a train? Have you been to a railway station? Have you travelled by train?

Activity 15.1: Train! Train!
The teacher and students link hands or hold the person ahead, to mimic a locomotive
followed by several compartments joined in a chain. Students who are familiar with trains
might think of acting as a goods or passenger train, as trolley cars, as petrol or milk tankers,
first and second class coaches, general and women's coaches, pantry car (from where food is
distributed), luggage car, mail car, and so on. These different cars might be suggested with
the use of simple props. Train stations could also be included in the action. An appropriate
poem or song and various train sounds will go well with this activity. The songs and poems
might be in the students' mother tongues rather than in English. Students may also know
some train-related songs from popular films and may like to enact these scenes too.
Imitate the sounds made by trains.
With more experience students might be able to distinguish between a variety of sounds -
sounds made by fast-moving wheels, the rattling of carriages, sounds of different train horns
and whistles, sounds made by steam, diesel or electric engines and by generator cars. They
might even have observed the increase in loudness of sound while a train crosses a bridge,
goes through a tunnel, etc.
Have you been in a train that went over a bridge? Or through a tunnel? Describe how it felt
and sounded.
73
What smells have you noticed around trains?
Smells may range from those of oil and burning coal or diesel, to disinfectants, to the inviting
smell of food from the pantry car and from food vendors. You may have to help students put
their observations into words.
Have you counted the "bogies" of a train? When you get a chance notice where and how
two bogies are joined together.
"Bogies" are the wheeled carriages which carry the coaches and the engine or locomotive too.
Have you ever seen a train pulled by two or more engines? Have you seen an engine
pushing a train?
Watch a train carefully from the outside.
In observing a train closely, students would notice fascinating details, like engines of different
types, pantographs bobbing up and down on the roof of an electric train, the peculiarly
shaped rims of train wheels which guide them along the rails, various kinds of springs, the
pistons going in and out of drums, hissing of air brakes, water tanks being re-filled with long
hoses ... and so on. Discussion in the class will encourage students to observe further. Please
judge from students' interest and prior experience how many such words and ideas it is
appropriate to introduce to them.
Can a train run on a road? What kind of "road" does it run on?

Activity 15.2: Draw a picture of the railway tracks.
Tracks are made of parallel steel rails connected by sleepers forming H shapes. Students
might have noticed that the sleepers are made from wood, metal or cement.
Have you seen trains moving from one track to another? Show in your picture a place
where a train might cross to another track.
Having tried to draw this picture, students will in future be more observant in watching train
tracks and may even notice the switches which allow trains to move from one track to another.
Take Care
Do not cross railway tracks, except at a pedestrian crossing.

Activity 15.3: Make a model train using matchboxes, shoe boxes or other materials. Run the
train along tracks drawn on the floor. Draw the tracks in such a way that your train can turn
left or right without falling off the tracks!
Where do you go to take a train? Have you seen a small or a big train station?
Known examples of train stations are necessary. Words like platform, foot over-bridge,
subway, signal, stalls ... might be introduced here. Students could describe all that happens
on train stations and on platforms. A major point of interest might be the food stalls and vendors.
To which town or city did you go to by train? Have you ever travelled by train inside a big city?
Give an example of a nearby "town" or a "city" and what it means to be "inside" a city. If possible
74
introduce ideas of local and long-distance trains, shuttles, etc..
Students would enjoy describing the train journeys that they have taken, which station they
got on and off, the stations on the way, what they saw or did on the route, did they go up
hills and over rivers, how long was the journey, any memorable events, etc.. Children often
have lasting memories of food that they eat on journeys!
Take Care
Be careful while getting into a train. Don’t try to get in or step out while the train is moving.
While on the platform, keep away from the edge especially when a train is passing by.
Cars and buses are parked in a "garage". Where are trains and locomotives parked? Have
you ever seen a "yard" or a "shed"?
Activity 15.4: Draw pictures of a train or a railway station. Count the bogies in your train.
Depending on the students' experiences and interest you might go on to discuss trains for
goods and for people, slow and fast trains, express trains, mail trains and passenger trains,
as also different types of engines, the engine driver, motor man, guard, porter, station master,
ticket window, ticket checker, platform ticket, etc.
How do you know when a train is coming to a platform and where it will go?
Students should know that trains are supposed to arrive and leave at specified times. They
should have at least a rough idea about systems like platform and coach numbers, different
signs, electronic indicator boards, printed time-tables, public announcements and so on, so
that they pay attention to them and eventually learn to use them (they need not know all the
words mentioned here). Although the practical use of these systems is more relevant for older
people, for students they are useful in developing a general awareness as well as the skills of
literacy and numeracy.

Activity 15.5: Make a collection of train tickets, passes and coupons.
Students should try to read the words and numbers written on the tickets, particularly the
date of travel, the destination and the cost of the ticket.
Activity 15.6: Act out any scene at a train station. You might use the tickets you have
collected to act out a scene at the ticket window.
New words
railway, tracks, rails, sleepers, locomotive, bogie, coach, compartment, local, outstation, yard,
platform, indicator, announcement ...
75
This topic aims to make students aware of the
occupations of various adults around them, their
work and their contribution to the community.
Depending on their environment students may be
exposed to a variety of different occupations. In
earlier topics we have referred to school-related
professions like the teacher, principal, etc.; bus
conductor and driver, railway staff, vendors in the
market, postman and staff in the post office, etc.
One professional with whom children come into
close contact, and often remain in awe of, is the
doctor. Students might relate their experiences and
observations at the clinic, primary health centre or
hospital - about the people there (doctor, nurse,
staff, patients ...) and about common instruments
like the thermometer, tongue depressor,
stethoscope and injection syringe. As always,
it is fine to use big words as long as they make
sense in the child's world-view. Students might
also act out a scene at the clinic, read simple
printed words on medical prescriptions, try to
feel their friend's pulse ... and so on.
Apart from the ones mentioned so far, students may know of other
professions, for example, scientist, engineer, architect, pilot, artist,
actor, singer, dancer, musician, writer, poet, as also
common occupations like, the farmer, shepherd,
fisherman or woman, potter, cobbler, artisan,
goldmith, ironsmith, weaver, tailor, barber, butcher, carpenter, mechanic, cook,
waiter, milkman or woman, gardener, newspaper delivery
person, sweeper, rag-picker, watchman, construction labourer,
farm labourer. They may know about prominent persons in
the community like, the village sarpanch, government official,
soldier, priest, politician, policeman or woman, businessman
or woman ... etc. In addition, in the locality there may be
nomadic people or migrant workers engaged in
different occupations. And finally, do not forget one occupation that
often remains unrecognised, that of a house-manager or house-parent!
This is a long list of occupations; in actual fact there may be only a
few such occupations that are suitable for doing with your class.
Please do include occupations from all categories, to
encourage respect for all types of work.

16. People at work
76
Students would learn a great deal by talking with a professional about his or her work. You
might invite this person to the school, or if possible, take the students to their place of work.
Make sure that the talking is accompanied by observation and demonstrations. A number of
activities and projects could be built around a single occupation. Only some sample questions
are given here. The possibilities are unlimited.
Have you seen this person working? Where?
What does (s)he do? What things (tools or implements) does
(s)he use for this work?
In what way does (s)he help us all? What would happen if (s)he does
not do this work properly or regularly or goes for a long holiday?
Could someone else do this work? Could we do it on our own?
Some occupations may be full-time, part-time or seasonal.

Activity 16.1: Watch these people at work.
Talk to them and find out more about
them and their work.
The class should meet some persons with
different occupations. If you are visiting
their place of work, instruct students to
observe the work without causing disturbance
and only later ask questions. Initially students may feel shy to talk with
unknown persons and may need to be helped and encouraged.

Activity 16.2: Dumb charade - Recognise the person from a chit
with a simple drawing (stick figure) and pictures of tools that the
person uses. Act out this occupation for others to guess.
The initial guessing will be easy if the number of occupations is kept
limited. It can be followed up with further acting - for example,
students may perform different actions of a sweeper - say the use of a
broom, dust-pan, mop and so on, while others guess the action.

Activity 16.3: Draw a person doing his
or her work. Also draw the different
things or tools which (s)he uses.

Activity 16.4: Make a "Thank-you card"
for someone who you think is very
helpful to all of us.
