me and my family 1
12
This is a good topic to begin the new school year. Talking
about ourselves and our families should create a relaxed
atmosphere in the classroom besides serving to introduce
students to the teacher and to each-other. You as teacher
should start by introducing yourself in an informal and
interesting way (for example, the place you come from,
your hobbies ...).

Myself

What is your name? Do your friends or family call you by some pet name?
If possible get the students’ full names in complete sentences, without being too formal about it.
Where do you live? Nearby? Some distance away? What is your address? Who are all the
persons living in your house? Any close family members living away from the home?

Mother

By what name do you call your mother?
Ma, Amma, Aai, Mummy ... use these same terms in further
conversations.
Count how many students use a particular name.
Students raise their hands for each name, then one student
counts.
What is her real name? If you do not know, ask her.
Depending on how prepared the students are, encourage and help them to answer in full
sentences like, "My mother's name is ________."
What all things do you do with your mother? What kind of
clothes does your mother wear? Do you like to wear such
clothes? Do you sometimes in play dress up like your mother?
Count how many mothers wear particular kind of
clothes, like saris (worn in different styles), salwaar
kameez, skirts, pants, etc.
What all does your mother do at home? Does your
mother work outside the house? What does she do?

Activity 1.1: Play "Home"!

Act like your mother or father or any other member of
your family. Act out some everyday scene in your home.
Act out a scene in which some visitors come to your house.

1. my Family
13

Father

Questions to parallel those for mother:
By what name do you call your father?
Papa, Baba, Abba ...

What is your father's real name? If you do not know,
ask him.

What all things do you do with your father?

What clothes does your father wear? Do you like to wear such clothes? Do you sometimes
in play dress up like your father?

What all does your father do at home? Does your father work outside the house? What does
he do?
In any classroom there may be significant variation in cultures and in socio-economic status
of families. 
Questions on work and lifestyles should therefore be handled with sensitivity.
Encourage an appreciation of different lifestyles. Emphasise the role of women as well as men.

Activity 1.2: Draw a picture of your mother or father doing some work. Write their name
next to the picture.

How do you help your parents in the house? Do your sisters and brothers also help around
the house? In what way?
Sister, Brother, Cousin

How many sisters and brothers do you have? Are they older than you (big)
or younger (small)?

How many of you have an elder sister or brother?

How do you call her or him? What is her or his name?

In which class is (s)he studying? Does (s)he play with
you? help in your studies? fight with you? etc.

How many of you have a younger sister or brother
(name, age)? Does (s)he have teeth? What all does
(s)he do (crawl? sit up? walk or run? jump? babble?
talk? what else? any naughty things)? What does
(s)he eat? How do you play with her or him? Do you
trouble or are troubled by her or him?
Act like (imitate) your younger sister or brother.
You may similarly discuss cousin sisters and brothers.
14

Grandfather, Grandmother

By what name do you call them? Describe what they look like.
What do they do? Do they tell you stories (name some), help
with your school work?
Other family members
Any other family members in the home eg., uncles, aunts? Talk about them.
Any family members whom you visit or who visit you, say in the vacations ...?
Any recent functions in the family? Which relatives and friends did you meet then?
Pets
Do you have a pet or domestic animal?
Explain that "animal" includes birds, turtles, fishes, etc.
Some people might keep frogs, snakes and lizards too.
What is your pet’s name? What food does it eat? What
all does it do? Do you play with your pet?
Activity 1.3: Draw a picture showing the members of your family. Select words from the
list on the blackboard - My mother, My father, Myself, My sister, My grandfather.... and write
them under the pictures. Write their names too.
Count how many members are there in your family and write down,
"I have ________ people in my family".

Activity 1.4: Finger puppets - Choose different fingers of your hand as the
members of your family and draw their faces. Make them talk to each other.
Blackboard work:
15

How many of you have only one member in your family? How many of you have two, three ...
Draw with the help of stick figures, a family with one member, two members ... Ask students
to raise their hands then count and write how many students in the class have that many
members in their family.
How we address our parents
“Mother!” “Father!”
Manipuri Ima Impa
Assamese Maa Deotaa
Hindi/Hindustani/ Maa, Amma, Mataram Pitaji, Babuji, Bauji, Baba
Urdu Ammi, Ammijaan, Ammiji Abba, Abbu, Abbajaan, Abbaji
Punjabi Maa, Bebe, Bibi, Chaiji Bapu, Baba, Papaji, Paaji
Sindhi Ammi, Amma, Bhabhi Abba, Baba
Gujarati Baa Bapu, Bapuji
Marathi Aai, Aay, Aaye, Baye, Baba, Dada, Nana, Anna, Bhau,
Nani, Vahu Appa, Tatya, Bappa, Ba
Konkani Mai Anna
Kannada Amma, Avva Appa, Anna
Malayalam Amma, Amme Acchan, Acchaa
Umma, Ammachi Uppa, Appacchan
Tamil Amma Appa
Telugu Amma Naana, Nayna, Appa, Ayya
Oriya Bau Bappa
Bengali Maa, Maago Baba
Student’s Drawings
16

The purpose of these activities is to get to know one's body while learning
names of the parts of the body. The terms "left" and "right" are also introduced.
Parts of the body
How many different actions can you do with your body while remaining
in one place? Do them.
Show how many different actions you can do with your body if you are
allowed to move from one place to another.
Depending on the size of the class and the space available, these actions could be done by
one or more students at one time. Alternatively they might be tried outside the classroom.
See how many kinds of expressions you can show with your face.
Write words like "happy", "sad", "angry", "afraid", "surprised" on the blackboard and explain
them. Then write them on chits of paper. Call each student in turn to pick up one chit.
Students act out this expression, without making any sound. Others should guess their mood.
Nod, nod, nod, shake your head
In how many ways can you move it, you said?
Blink, blink, raise your eyebrows
Pucker those lips, wiggle that nose
Wrinkle the forehead, run fingers through hair
Raise your chin, fill cheeks with air
Open your mouth, show teeth within
Hold your tongue out and then in!
Hold your ears, raise your shoulders
Put up both arms and wiggle ten fingers ...
Raise your right arm, then the left arm.
While introducing the terms "left" and "right" to the students see
that you are facing in the same direction as the students or else
they may get confused.
Point to your elbows, wrists, hands, palms and fingers. What actions can you do using your
hands only?
2. My Body
17

Clap in different ways.
You may clap first in various rhythms and ask students to repeat after you, for example,
1,2 1,2 1,2 ......
1,2,3 1,2,3 1, 2, 3 ......
1,2,3,4,5 1,2,3,4,5 1,2,3,4,5 ......
Snap your fingers. Count and tell how many fingers you have.
Are the fingers of one hand of the same size? Which finger is the tallest, shortest,
thinnest, thickest? Make shadow figures with your hands and fingers.

Activity 2.1: Dip your fingers or palms in watercolour and press them on paper to make

designs. Make pictures of animals, people, flowers or fruits using your thumb-marks. Some
of you together make a simple drawing and fill it with colourful thumb-marks.
Point to your chest, belly, back, buttocks. Point to your thighs, knees, calves, feet and toes.
How many toes do you have? What actions can you do using just your feet and toes?
Stamp your feet, first left, then right, left, right ... Hold your right knee with your right hand,
left knee with right hand and so on.
Sing an action song!
There are a number of action songs in different languages involving parts of the body. In
English there are songs like "Boogie Woogie" or "Hokey Pokey": "You put your left leg in and your
left leg out, you put your left leg in and you shake it all about, you do a boogie woogie and you
turn yourself around, that's what it's all about", etc. There are also several rhymes involving
finger actions.
Let’s play "Simon says ..."
If instructions are prefixed with "Simon says ..." like, "Simon says clap your hands", then
students follow them but if an instruction is given without "Simon says ..." then they are not
to follow it - if they do they are out.
How many ________ do you have?
Ask this question for different parts of the body.
Which body parts do you have in pairs, that is two in number?
18

Activity 2.2: Make paper clothes.

Draw some stick figures on a sheet of
paper. With the students’ help draw
and tear or cut out a variety of dresses
from paper or cloth.
Paste the dresses on the stick figures. Ask about the different lengths of
the dresses - are they above, up to or below the knees, up to the ankles ...
are they without sleeves or with short sleeves, sleeves upto the elbows or
full sleeves ...? You may also make paper clothes for pencil figures.

Activity 2.3: Match the labels.

Draw a picture of a child on chart paper or on a flannel board. Prepare
a set of labels by writing names of various body parts on pieces of paper
or cardboard from old notebook covers. Distribute the labels among
the students.
Read out your label and stick it next to the part of the body written on it.
If students are at a very early stage of literacy, the picture could already be labelled. The
students will then match their labels to these and try to recognise the word.
Keeping neat and clean
Each one of you bring to class one thing you use to keep your body clean and tidy like,
a toothbrush, comb, soap, towel, etc..
Now act out one of these - brushing teeth, rinsing mouth, washing face, having a bath,
combing hair, washing hands and feet, cutting nails ...
How we grow
Do your old clothes fit you now? What do you do with old clothes? Bring to class some of
your old clothes which are now too small for you.
Are there things you can do or any places you can reach, which you could not do when you
were younger or which a younger child cannot do?
Teacher might suggest some examples.
Take Care
Be careful while trying to reach for places you cannot - don’t fall and hurt yourself.
19

The aim is to increase students’ sensory
awareness and to encourage them to use
their senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell
and taste to know more about the world
around them.
Seeing
Close your eyes or blindfold yourself. Stay this way for few minutes. What are the things
you can do with your eyes closed and what things is it difficult to do? One of you try to
catch your friends with your eyes blindfolded.
What sights make you feel very happy? What colours do you like? What is the biggest thing
you have seen? Smallest? Which shapes do you know?
We get to know about things by seeing them, observing their shape, size, colour, etc.. We also
learn more about them by their sound, touch, smell and taste.
Hearing

Activity 3.1: Keep your eyes closed and listen carefully to sounds made with some objects.

Guess which objects could make these sounds. Can you hear the sound well if your ears
are covered?
Example set: hollow objects like bottle or ball, wooden and plastic rulers, chalk, coins,
marbles, pack of cards, a leafy branch ... The objects might be placed behind a screen. Create
sounds by shaking, tapping, scraping, hitting on a table, dropping on the ground or flipping
(for example, the pack of cards).
Have a friend stand behind you and speak or sing. Can you recognise who it is by
the sound alone? Do you know any person with a voice very different or interesting? Do you
know someone who can whistle a song?
Are there any places that you recognise by their sounds? What sounds do you hear in the
kitchen, on roads, in your school, in a forest, a field ...?
Recall some sounds, make different sounds of your own. Remember the sounds of musical
instruments, the sound of rain, of flowing water, of any bird or animal ...
Which sounds are loud, soft? Which sounds do you like? Which sounds make you happy?
Have you ever got scared or irritated by some sound?
Touching

Activity 3.2: 

Close your eyes. A friend will keep in front of you a tray full of things. Pick
up one of these things and guess what it is with your eyes closed.
3. knowing what is around Me
20Example set: paper, book, pencil, eraser, spoon, ribbon, candle, piece of ice ... For older
children you may include objects with more similarities like, a set of different leaves, different
types of seeds or dried fruit, or pieces of different types of fabric, like cotton, jute, wool, silk,
chiffon. The things may also be kept in a cloth or paper bag or a cardboard box with a hole
to put in a hand. Another interesting modification may be to ask children to pick out pairs of
similar things (for example, two chikoo seeds) by touch alone.
Name some things which feel smooth, rough, slippery, soft, hard, sharp, pointed, wet, moist,
dry, hot, warm or cold ...
Your friend will trace an alphabet on your back with her or his finger. Guess it! Try to
recognise simple (3 or 4 letter) words in this way.
Smelling
Activity 3.3: Remain blindfolded while a friend holds something
near your nose. Guess what it is, without touching it! With
your nose pressed shut can you still recognise it?
Describe the smell - is it pleasant or unpleasant, sweet,
sour or sharp ...?
Example set: pieces of fruits like lemon, orange, pineapple; petals
of fragrant flowers like rose, jasmine; crushed leaves like curry
leaf, coriander, neem, mint, betel leaf; strong-smelling cut
vegetables like onion, radish, garlic; crushed spices like
cardamom, cloves, cinnamon; some everyday objects with distinctive
smells like fresh newspaper, eraser, leather purse ... The objects may be tied in a cloth or put
in a small paper bag.
Are there any places that you can recognise by smell alone? Which smells do you like,
which do you not? Name some things which do not have any smell.
Tasting

Activity 3.4: The teacher will give you something to taste. Guess what it is.

Example set: grain of salt, sugar, tamarind, jaggery, pieces of fruits, roti, pickle ...
Name some things which are sweet, sour, salty, bitter or hot.
Now guess, which parts of our body help us to see, hear, feel, smell and taste?