things around us 6
20. Our classroom
21. Shapes and sizes
22. Going on a ride

Though "Things around us" is the final Unit in this book,
the first topic in it "Our classroom" might be introduced
early in the school year. This topic will help develop
students' vocabulary, enabling them to speak with clarity
in relation to objects around them. Simple ideas about materials and properties as well as
some number and space concepts are also introduced here.
Things in the classroom
Name all that you see in the classroom.
Every classroom has its unique location and arrangement. Students
should learn to name the objects in it including furniture and fittings.

Activity 20.1: Place this label near the object.
Prepare cards with names of different things in the classroom,
preferably those with simple, easy-to-read names. In a large classroom
where placing labels near objects may not be practicable, students might read the word from
the blackboard and then point to the object.

Activity 20.2: Count these things.
Begin with objects in the classroom that are exactly one in number. Then go on to two, three,
etc. Ask the students to count the objects and tell you, say, how many doors, windows,
desks, bags, etc. are there. Conversely you may ask them to name the objects which are one
in number, two, three, and so on.

Activity 20.3: What is this made of?
Consider different things in your classroom like books,
pencils, pens, erasers, rulers, duster, handkerchief, coins,
belts, purse, slippers, mirror, etc. which are made of some common materials like,
wood, paper, cloth, metal, glass, plastic, rubber, clay, leather and so on. Preferably
choose things that are made of predominantly one material. You may also add
things from your collection of scrap objects, like old newspapers, bottles, bottle-tops,
boxes, twigs and wooden articles, old keys, pieces of clay pots, pieces of bricks or
pottery, scraps of cloth, bags, pieces of metal, etc.

Activity 20.4: Group together all the things that are made of wood. Similarly group things
made of paper, cloth, metal, glass, plastic, rubber, clay, leather ...
Point out other things in the classroom that are made of these materials.
Name other articles (outside the classroom) made of these materials.
You or the students might also think of other ways to group things, like colour, shape,
texture, brittleness (things that break easily), things that are heavy or light, etc.

20. our classroom

Activity 20.5: Spot the difference!
Hold up two similar objects, say two books, and ask students to
come up with as many differences as possible. They may also
express points of similarity. You may give a few pointers as below.
Notice the colours and pictures on the covers. Which book is larger, smaller, taller, shorter,
wider or narrower? Which book has more pages? Which is thicker or thinner?
Have you read these books? What is written in them? Do they have any stories or pictures?
You might ask students in turn to hold up a book of their choice and say at least one sentence
to compare it with a book of your choice.
Count the people

Activity 20.6: Count how many people there are in the classroom.
Do not forget yourself and your teacher!
If this task is difficult, as it would be in a large classroom, ask each
student to call out the numbers 1, 2, 3 ... serially. The last number
called out, makes the total count.

Activity 20.7: Where are you in this classroom?
On a large sheet of paper make a grid of blocks or circles according to the number of benches
or the number of students in the class (the latter, in case they sit on the floor or in some other
informal arrangement). Write the names of students in these blocks according to their seating
arrangement. Place this sheet oriented similar to the classroom. Call the students one at a
time to ask the questions below. During this time the other students might be engaged in
another activity, say 
Activity 20.8.
Lightly shade with a crayon the block or circle
in which your name is written. Who sits to your
right? Find his or her name in the sheet. Point
out in the class and then on the sheet, who is
sitting to your left, in front of you and behind you.
If the students sit in rows, give each row a serial
number. When you call out the number of a row,
all the students in that row act out some
pre-decided action, for example, stand up quickly
and sit down again. You may make this activity
more fun by calling out the row numbers
randomly in quick succession.

Activity 20.8: Make a drawing of your classroom or
of some things that you see in your classroom.
Sample worksheet in which students
were asked to shade their name and
that of the student on their right
The aim of this section is to teach, through everyday observations, a few simple mathematical
concepts. First we introduce some flat (two-dimensional) shape terms like, circle, triangle,
square, rectangle and oval, encouraging students to notice such shapes in their environment.
Depending on students' readiness, they may also be made aware of three-dimensional shapes
like sphere (ball), cylinder, cone, cube, cuboid, pyramid and prism. Next we introduce sizes,
lengths and weights. We end with some games on shadows.
Shapes

Activity 21.1: Group the similar shapes together. Learn the names of these shapes.
Arrange the shapes into some patterns.
Use cut-outs of various shapes in different sizes from cardboard, old notebook covers,
newspaper, or craft paper of different colours. Give each student or a group some of these
cut-outs for sorting and making patterns. Introduce the terms circle, triangle, square,
rectangle and oval.
Blackboard work: Which different shapes do you see in this picture?
Blackboard work: Circles and Ovals: Fill the circles, hatch the ovals.

21. shapes and sizes

Blackboard work: Squares and Rectangles: Fill the squares, hatch the rectangles.
Worksheet: Several simple shapes are drawn in different sizes and orientations. Students
colour each type of shape, say, all squares, in a particular colour. Next they draw and
colour shapes of their own.
Name some objects shaped like these, in the classroom and outside.
Triangle - tiles, sandwich ...; Rectangle - book or page, blackboard, slate, top of a table, door
or window-frame, bed, TV screen; Square - slice of bread, top of a stool, handkerchief ...;
Circle - roti, bangle, ring, wheel ...

Activity 21.2: Draw different kinds of lines and curves.
Now draw straight lines in different ways - standing, sleeping or slanting.

Activity 21.3: Draw different kinds of triangles.
Worksheet: Colour only the triangles among these.
Blackboard work: Which of these are triangles?
straight dashed dotted wavy zig-zag looped spiral curved

Activity 21.4: Shapes from sticks
Start with four matchsticks or toothpicks per student.
How many different shapes or designs can you make using all four sticks?
How many different designs can you make using five or six sticks? Once you make a
design, copy it on a paper before trying a new one.
Students will realise that increasing the number of sticks just one at a time, results in the
number of possible designs increasing remarkably quickly.

Activity 21.5: Make different shapes using small sticks. Make a picture by pasting sticks
on to a sheet of paper.
Now make some alphabets in this way. Which alphabets can be made using only straight
sticks and which ones cannot?
Use pieces of broom-stick, matchsticks or twigs. Sets of sticks of the same or different lengths
might be given to students. By playing with these sticks and trying to make different shapes
out of them, students will also get a feel for lengths. You may set them other tasks with the
sticks, as suggested next.

Activity 21.6: Which set of sticks will you choose for making an H shape?
Which set will you choose for making a triangle?

Activity 21.7: Draw a picture using different shapes.

Blackboard work: What will come next?
Draw some simple patterns on the board. Ask children to come and draw the next shape.
Now draw patterns similar to the ones drawn on the board but with different pictures.

Activity 21.8: Recall the designs.
Draw on a large sheet of paper a simple combination or a design made up of the basic
shapes. Show this to the students for a few seconds.
Remember this design and draw it later.
Show the design again after the students complete their drawing to let them compare the
two. Repeat with other designs or make the same design a little more complex each time,
asking students to spot what is added to the design and then to add the details to their own
design.

Activity 21.9: Tear or cut out different shapes from an old newspaper or magazine.

Activity 21.10: Turn one shape into another.
Rectangular sheets of paper are given to the students.
What is the shape of this paper? Fold it into a square. Now unfold it into a rectangle.
Take another square. Fold to make a triangle from this square.
Try to make other triangles out of this triangle.
Can you make a circle from a square?

Avtivity 21.11: Halve the shape.
Make cut-out shapes from paper similar to those used in

Activity 21.1, but these cutouts should be foldable. Use some
bilaterally symmetric and some asymmetric shapes, as shown in the figure.
Fold the shapes to divide them into equal halves.
Can you fold all the shapes into equal halves? Before folding guess whether the shape will
fold into equal halves and write ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ on the cut-out.
Is there more than one way to fold this shape into equal halves?
Guess whether these shapes can be folded into "quarters" (four equal parts)? Shade one
of the quarters.
Two children want to equally share a paratha. Use circle cut-outs to show in how many
ways they can do this.
Shapes which are not flat!
Name things shaped like a:
Ball (lemon, orange, pea, ladoo, bead, marble, ball-bearing, soap bubble)
Box (brick, duster, matchbox, dice, carton, cupboard)
Rod (pencil, pole, pillar, pipe, tin can, steel dabba, log of wood, tubelight)
Cone (funnel, chana pudi, birthday or joker cap, ice-cream cone)
Draw a few interesting shapes, like the shape of a star, kite, flag, bottle,
glass, the moon ...
Sizes

Activity 21.12: Smallest to biggest.
Before the class ask the students to collect ten pebbles or stones of different sizes.
Count the stones that you have brought. Pick up the smallest of all the stones and keep it
aside. Then count the remaining stones. Again choose the smallest of the remaining stones
and keep it behind the previous stone and count how many are left. Repeat with the
remaining stones.
See, you have arranged the stones in order of size. Show me which way the size is
"increasing" and which way it is "decreasing".

Activity 21.13: Tear a small piece from a sheet of an old newspaper. Crumple and roll it
into a ball. Now make a ball bigger than the first one. Make a few more such balls of
different sizes. Arrange these balls from largest to smallest.
Students will realise that a larger sheet of paper makes a larger ball - but all balls should be
rolled equally tight. The balls may also be made from clay or dough.

Activity 21.14: Shortest to longest.
Take pencils or twigs or paper strips or ropes of different lengths and arrange them from the
shortest to the longest.
Blackboard work: Shortest to longest.
Draw some horizontal lines of increasing or
decreasing lengths on the blackboard.
Is the second line different from the first one?
What about the third line? What is the difference?
Now, you draw such lines (from shortest to
longest or vice versa).
Students may not at first realise that the starting points of the lines need to be vertically aligned.
Make patterns by drawing lines of different lengths.

Activity 21.15: Who can jump the longest?
Outside the classroom, draw a line on the ground. One-by-one jump from this line; try
to jump as far from the line as you can. Mark where you reach by drawing a line there
(parallel to the first line). Who could jump the longest?

Activity 21.16: Shortest to tallest.
Stand in small groups and arrange yourselves in a line, according to your height. Who is the
tallest and shortest among you all? Who all are taller than you and shorter than you?
Are any of you of equal height?
For the next two activities collect empty cardboard boxes of different sizes, for example,
matchboxes, cartons of toothpaste, tea powder, shoes etc., or water-proof containers like
bottles, glasses, tin cans, vessels, etc.

Activity 21.17: Which is the biggest, smallest, tallest and shortest? Which shapes are
broad, which are narrow?

Activity 21.18: How much does it hold?
Give each small group of students some containers of different sizes and some water or sand.
Fill a container with water or sand, then pour the contents into another container. Does the
other container fill completely? Does anything still remain in the first container?
Now pour from the second container into another container. Can you tell, before pouring,
if all the contents will fit, or not, or if any room will be left over in the next container?

Activity 21.19: Heavier and lighter
Make some simple weighing balances (see Small science Class 3, page 56). Give a weighing
balance to each of a group of students. Let them try to balance the instrument, putting
different things into both pans to see what happens. This early playful introduction to the
balance will prepare them well for the measuring activities and concepts to be done in later
classes.

Activity 21.20: Smaller and heavier?
Make some sets of containers, for example:
1. A large empty bottle and a small empty bottle
2. A large bottle full of water and a small bottle full of water
3. A large empty bottle and a smaller bottle full of water
4. A bigger cardboard box full of leaves and a smaller one full of stones or sand.
For each set, ask one student to guess which is heavier and which is lighter. Another student
could lift up the containers to tell if the guess is right.
Shadows

Activity 21.21: Out in the sunshine, watch your own shadow. Is it of the same shape and
size as you? Move in different ways and see how your shadow changes.

Activity 21.22: How do you cast the shadow? One of you cast a shadow on a sheet of
paper using your hand. Another student trace around the shadow using a crayon. Exchange
positions when you finish. Try to make different shadow figures and trace their outline.

Activity 21.23: Play this game with some friends. While the others run, one of you try to
stamp on their shadow. When someone's shadow gets stamped, he or she has to stand still,
till the end of the game. The student whose shadow gets stamped on last is the winner and
will catch others in the next game.

Activity 21.24: Another little game with shadows: touch something and see if your shadow
touches it too. Now move away your hand, but in a way that the shadow of your hand still
touches it!
105
22. going on a ride
Moving vehicles can be a joy. Babies like watching
vehicles pass by, and even better, riding on one. There is
something fascinating about these contraptions which
are not alive, yet move purposefully from one place to
another. Older children play with toy vehicles, and
enjoy taking a ride, whether on a simple push-cart or bicycle, or on a high-speed train.
We have already (in Unit 4) talked about buses and trains. Here we take up other familiar
vehicles, and also introduce some new ones.
Watch out for vehicles!

Activity 22.1: Bring to class any toy vehicle. In Topics 14 and 15 you may have made
a model bus or a train. Keep these toy vehicles in the display area in your class.
Tell the class whether you have watched, or travelled in, some vehicle.
Imitate the sounds of different vehicles.
Blackboard work: Which vehicles do you know?
Bicycle, tricycle, scooter, motorcycle (motorbike), mo-ped, autorickshaw, phut-phut, bullockcart,
camel-cart, horse-cart, tractor, car, jeep, bus, van, truck, train, boat, ship, submarine,
airplane, helicopter ...
Students may know, yet not readily name, some unfamiliar vehicles like ships or airplanes.
Give pointers like,
How would you go across a river or an ocean, how do people go to a far-away country, ...?
Write some common vehicle names in a column on the left of the blackboard. In front of the
respective names add the responses of students given in answer to questions asked during
further discussion.
What (road, etc.) does this vehicle move on?
On rough land, on a road, on (or in) water, in air.
106
How many wheels does (this vehicle) have?
Group the vehicles in this way, or write the number of wheels next to the name of the vehicle.
Preferably restrict this discussion to common and familiar vehicles.
Which do you think is the smallest, and which is the biggest of these vehicles?
The vehicles might be listed in an increasing order of size or given a serial number according
to size.
Size comparisons might be made between two vehicles, or else between the vehicle and some
familiar objects in the surroundings. You might also ask, "Could this vehicle pass through
that gate?" or, "Could it fit inside this classroom?" Such an imaginary or fantastic situation,
for example, "Could a truck fit into our classroom?" might be entertaining to some children,
but it might as easily be confusing or frightening to some, so use your judgement about the
kind of comparisons to suggest.
How many people, do you think, could fit into this vehicle? Does this vehicle also carry goods?
Why do we go from one place to another? Why do we need to travel?
Activity 22.2: Ask a few people about their reasons for travelling. How often do they travel?
Where do they go? On foot or in some vehicle? How much time does it take to reach there?
If I have to go say, from the school gate to a nearby shop, how should I go? If I have to go a
little further? Or very far? Could I walk up there or should I take a vehicle? Why?
Give suitable examples of places or landmarks in your area.
Would you reach a place quicker by walking or by riding on some vehicle?
Take Care
Always be careful on the roads. Use footpaths to walk along a road. Cross the road with
an adult. Look both ways before crossing.
Which vehicle do you think goes the fastest? Which one would take the least time to reach
some place? Which vehicle would you use to go to (give the name of any far-away place
known to students).
Which vehicle goes the slowest?
Try to number or rank the vehicles according to their (maximum) speed.
Fuel for vehicles
Even the youngest students could get some idea about energy by relating it to the use of fuels.
After walking or running for a long time we get tired and say, "I don't have energy any more."
We need energy to walk, or run, or do any work. We get energy by eating food. When we
pedal we give energy which moves the bicycle. Where does the energy come from to move
a bullock-cart?
How does a scooter or a car move? What gives it energy?
Students may know of fuels like petrol and diesel. Depending on students' experiences, this
discussion might be extended to vehicles using other energy sources.
Take Care
Fuels can catch fire. Stay away from them. Keep them away from matchboxes,
fire-crackers, lighters and open flames.
Choose any two familiar vehicles:
In what ways are these (two vehicles) different? In what ways are they similar?

Activity 22.3: Draw some vehicles that you see or use often.

Activity 22.4: Count the vehicles going by.
Station a group of students at a safe place close to a road
such that they can watch the vehicles going by. Give to
the group some pebbles along with a set of paper bags
each with a picture of a common vehicle. On a busy road
it may be better to choose a time with less traffic than usual, whereas in a remote area a time
of more traffic would be preferable.
Watch out for the type of vehicle whose name or picture is given to you. Whenever this type
of vehicle passes by, drop a pebble in that bag. After say ten minutes count the number of
pebbles in each bag to know how many such vehicles have passed by in that time.
Write the names of all the vehicles which were counted, or make small drawings of them,
along a straight line. Line up the pebbles for that vehicle in front of its name or picture.
Or you may draw a bar made of little squares next to the name or picture of the vehicle.
Draw as many little squares as the number of that kind of vehicle counted by your group.
Look at this picture-graph and tell - which kind of vehicle did you see the most? Which
kind of vehicle went by the least number of times?
Finally, you may introduce some absolutely new vehicles like, ships, submarines, airplanes,
and even space-ships. They would be fascinated to see photographs of people (astronauts)
who have landed on the moon and close-up views of the planets.
Do you know that people have sent space-ships to the moon, and to planets such as Mars,
Venus, Jupiter, Saturn and even beyond? Of these, the moon is the closest to us, and people
have landed on the moon. So far, no person has gone beyond the moon but space-ships have
carried cameras which have sent us back photographs of these far-away planets!
We leave the final topic of this Teacher's Book Class 1 and 2 on this high note - children have a
vast potential for learning. Listen to them, work with them and literally, the sky is the limit!
Students’ Drawings
3
6
4
2
3
Games offer enjoyable routes to a host of learning opportunities. While
contributing to physical and mental fitness, games foster muscular, visualspatial
and interpersonal skills. Outdoor and indoor games help fine-tune
children's eye-hand coordination. Along with dance and gymnastics, games
develop in the child an awareness of his or her own body and of its movement
in space. Complementary to the formal academic program, games can
develop verbal, logical and mathematical skills too. Many games encourage
imagination and creativity, help children focus on a task, and develop their
patience, discipline and understanding through following of rules and directions.
Children develop social skills naturally while interacting with their peers during games.
They learn to co-operate, adjust to sometimes conflicting demands, and give their best in
a team effort.
Thus play is a rewarding experience, essential to a child's all-round development. Some
games relevant to the topics in this book have been suggested at appropriate points. Here
we give a general list of some common games. A few of these you may find ridiculously
common, but they are given here for your reference. You may adapt and modify them to
your purpose. The games might be played in the physical activity period or offered as
reward for good work or discipline.
Most of the games described here are appropriate for small groups of five to fifteen children.
If these games are known in your area, please refer to them by their local names (some
English, Hindi and Marathi names are mentioned here). Also add to this list other locallyplayed
games.
Outdoor games
1. Run and chase or Tag (Pakda-pakdi)
The "den" runs around trying to catch one of the other children,
who then in turn becomes the den.
There are interesting variations on this game
i) Team tag or Chain-chain (Sakhli - sakhli)
Whoever the den catches, links hands with the den and they together try to catch the others.
This chain of catchers lengthens by one each time a child is "tagged".
ii) Statue tag or Ice and water (Vish-amrut)
The den catches one player saying, "Ice" or "Vish". Now this player freezes in his or her
posture till touched by another player who says "Water" or "Amrut". Thus the den has to try
to not only "freeze" all other players but also to not let them touch the ones who are already
tagged.
Games

iii) Relay tag
One of the players carries something light, like a ball or a roll of paper, which is easy to carry
while running. The den tries to catch this player, who must dodge the den and pass the
object on to another player, whom the den must then try to catch.
iv) Hop and tag (Langdi)
The den hops on one leg to catch the others. Else the players divide into two teams. Players
of one team run while one player of the other team hops and tries to catch them. If this
player touches the lifted leg to the ground, then he or she is out of the game and the next
player of that team enters the play. When all the players of one of the teams are out, the
other team is declared the winner.
v) Cops and Robbers (Chor-pulees)
This game involves a run, chase and hide between two teams, the police and the thieves. In
the next round the two teams exchange roles.
vi) Spot the colour or Pinky, Pinky!
The den is asked, in rhyme-form, "Which colour do you want?" The other players have to
spot this chosen colour around them, say on someone's dress or on a plant or on anything
else. They run and touch this colour before the den gets them!
2. Hide and Seek (lukachhupi or Lapachhapi)
A fixed place, such as a tree or a wall, is chosen as home base. Here the den, facing the base,
closes his or her eyes and counts till ten, or in steps of 10 up to 100. The other players find a
place to hide. On finishing the count, the den looks around and on spotting a player calls out
his or her name, while touching the base. If the den goes on to locate all the players, the one
who was spotted first becomes the den in the next round. But if any player comes out of
hiding and, without the den noticing, touches the base or taps the den's back, then the play
begins again with the same den. This game is enjoyable if there are lots of hiding spaces for
the children.
3. Pillars (Khamb-khamb)
As many circles as the number of players minus one are
drawn on the ground, 10-15 steps apart from each other.
Players stand in these circles and try to exchange their
places while the den tries to catch those who are out of
the circles. If pillars or tree-trunks mark the spots then
circles are not needed.
111
4. Hills or water? or Sea, sand, water, land (Dongar ki pani)
Children decide how to divide the play area into "mountains" or "sand" and "water". The
den is asked to chose one of the areas (through a rhyme: In Hindi - Arotha ya parotha, ghee ka
ya tel ka, asli ya nakli, patthar ya pani, ya zameen ya asmaan ya ... ; In Marathi - Nili shaai kora
kagad, aamhi kunala bheet nahi, kaccha doodh peet nahi, dongar ki pani). The den tries to tag
whoever comes into his area.
5. Find the egg (Murgi, murgi, tera anda kahan hai?)
This game needs a small object and lots of places to hide it. The
"egg" is hidden without the den looking. The den is given some
riddles or hints to find it. When the "egg" is found, the player
who hid it becomes the next den.
6. Jump over the hurdle (Kanda-fodi)
The den sits with one leg stretched out in front. The players jump one by one over this
hurdle. The den increases the height of the hurdle by lifting one leg over the other, adding
hands and then bending in different ways.
7. Fire in the mountain, run run run ...
The den chants this verse, while the rest of the players go around in a circle. Suddenly the
den calls out a number. The players quickly form groups of this specified number. Players
who remain out recite the verse the next time.
8. Statue.
The den repeats "Ring, ring, ring ..." while the children rotate around themselves spreading
out their hands. Suddenly the den calls out "Statue!" and everyone must become still, striking
an interesting pose. The den gives points to the players, but also tries to tease and make them
laugh. Anyone who moves before getting the points is out.
9. Duck, duck, grey duck! (Aaicha patra haravla)
The children sit cross-legged in a circle and the den goes round them, calling out "Duck,
duck, duck ...", each time tapping on a player's head. All of a sudden, tapping on a player's
head the den says "Grey duck!" and runs. This player now has to run and try to catch the
den before the den completes the circle and sits in the empty place.
Alternatively, the den carries around a handkerchief. Everyone sings together a small song
or poem ("I sent a letter to my friend and on the way I dropped it. Someone came and picked
it up and put it in his pocket"). At the end of this, the den drops the cloth behind one of the
players, who has to notice it and chase the den.
112
More outdoor games
More outdoor games - Dodge ball (Aabadhubi), Lagori, Jump the rope or Skipping (there are
so many ways to do it!), Hopscotch, Tug o' war (oranges and lemons) ...
Indoor games
1. Guess who tagged you (Tikli maarun ja)
The children together choose a nickname for each child (say names of fruits, flowers, animals,
birds etc.), without letting the den know. Now one child closes the eyes of the den and calls
any of the children, using the nickname. Whoever is called comes forward quickly (if a child
forgets his nickname he or she is out!), gently taps on the forehead of the den and goes back.
The den has to guess who tagged him.
2. Chidiya udi or Chimni udali
The children sit in a circle with the tips of their forefingers poised on the floor. One of them
calls out names of different things quickly one after the other. The players lift their fingers
only for names of things that can fly (for example, birds like sparrow, crow and insects like
housefly as also light-weight objects like paper, feather, etc.).
3. Apdi - tupdi or Aapdi - thapdi
A group of five-six children sit in a circle and place their palms in the front, facing the
ground. One of them goes around the circle tapping the palms and sings (in Hindi -
Apdi-tupdi peepal ka paan, nana ne pakda nani ka kaan!) At the end of the song, the child whose
palm is tapped last holds his or her neighbours ears. This is repeated till everyone is holding
each others' ears with both the hands. Then all the children exclaim "Cheow meow, cheow
meow ..." and tickle each other!
4. Memory game
A set of a few small things (with simple names) are kept covered
with cloth. The cloth is removed for a minute or two and children
are allowed to see the objects. Then the objects are covered and
children write down (or list orally) the things they remember.
Some more object(s) may be added or removed and the children
asked to recall what is added or missing.
5. Passing the parcel
Any light object, "the parcel", is passed around among the group while one child, facing
away from the group, makes some sort of sound (like clapping, tapping ...). The sound is
stopped abruptly. Whoever holds the parcel at that moment has to perform a task given by
the group, for example sing a song or rhyme, act out, etc.
113
6. Group stories
One child starts telling a story and after a minute halts at an exciting moment. The next
person picks up the story from here and the same thing continues, till someone ends the story.
7. Tongue twisters
One by one children come forward and repeat a tongue twister as fast as they can, while the
others count. The one who repeats the most times without making a mistake wins. (The
phrase may be written on the blackboard.)
Some simple tongue twisters in English - Toy boat; She sells sea shells (on the sea shore); Red
leather yellow leather; Six thick sticks ...
In Hindi - Katccha papad pakka papad; Oont ooncha oont ki peeth oonchi oonchi oont ki poonchh.
8. Riddles
Simple riddles like, "I have teeth but no mouth. What am I?", "You cry when you cut me.
Guess what I am." are fascinating to children. You can make up such riddles and also ask
children to make up their own.
9. Sixteen chits (Sola chitthi)
Four chits each of four different things (or as many as the players) are made by drawing and
writing on small pieces of paper. These are then folded so that the contents are not seen. All
the chits are mixed up and each child picks up any four of them. The aim is to collect all four
chits of the same type. For this, each player serially puts down one unwanted chit and if the
next player needs this chit he will pick it or pass it to the next player. This continues till one
player wins by getting all four chits of one type. The winner quickly places his or her palm in
the middle and the rest join in, placing their palms over one another for second, third ...
positions.
Some more indoor games
Five stones (Sagar-gote), Snakes and ladders, Ludo or Challas, Chor police
(with chits), Tic-tac-toe, Dots and dashes, "Ring around the rosey", Guess
the tune, Word-finding, Jigsaw puzzles ...
Crafts
Craft activities too improve fine-motor skills and provide space for creative expression.
Activities like threading beads, weaving mats out of rope or strips of paper, paper-folding or
origami, cutting or tearing out patterns in paper, clay work, fort-making with mud, collage
work (filling up an outline with bits of old or waste coloured paper or cloth), making simple
masks out of paper bags, preparing match-box models, pattern making from imprints (say,
using crumpled paper, thread ball, or cut vegetables) ... would liven the class. Do not specify
the procedures for any craft activity too rigidly. Leave enough room for individual expression.
